Forest invasive species occur in all major taxonomic groups, from micro-organisms to mammals. These include bacteria, fungi, flatworms, nematodes, insects and arachnids, molluscs, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals, grasses, plants, trees and shrubs (FAO, 2009a).
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) reported that (FAO, 2009b):
- Insect pests: The most commonly reported species belong to the orders Coleoptera and Lepidoptera, which together make up over 70% of all insect pest species reported. Hemipteran species were the third most important insect order at 16%. In Africa, Asia and the Pacific, both Coleoptera and Lepidoptera made up the majority of reported pest species. Europe reported more Lepidoptera, while Latin America and the Caribbean reported more Coleoptera.
- Diseases: The majority of species were members of the phylum Ascomycota, which represented almost 60% of all pathogens reported. Basidiomycota species were the next major group at 33%. Four of the regions reported more Ascomycota species, while the Near East reported more Basidiomycota species.
- Other pests: Acarina species were the most common, followed by Artiodactyla species (even-toed ungulates) and Santalales (mistletoes and parasitic plants). Nematodes, rodents and primates were also classified as important pests. Africa reported more primate species, Europe more Artiodactyla, Latin America and the Caribbean more mistletoes and parasitic plants, and the Near East more Acarina species. In the Asia and Pacific region, nematodes and rodents were equally reported.Plants: Many invasive plants are woody species, including shrubs and trees, and they are among the most widespread and damaging (Richardson & Rejmánek, 2011 as cited in IPBES, 2023). While the exact number of established invasive woody species is unknown, Richardson and Rejmánek (2011; 2013 as cited in IPBES, 2023) compiled a global database listing 751 species-434 trees and 317 shrubs-spanning 90 plant families and 286 genera. These species have spread beyond their native ranges through various pathways, including horticulture (62%: 196 trees and 187 shrubs), forestry (13%), food production (10%) and agroforestry (7%). The regions with the highest numbers of invasive woody species are North America (212 species), the Pacific Islands (208), Australia (203), Southern Africa (178), Europe (134), and the Indian Ocean Islands (126) (IPBES, 2023).
Vertebrates: Invasive vertebrate herbivores have spread to forests in many regions, significantly affecting both aboveground and belowground ecosystems by altering forest community composition. Damage by invasive vertebrates can lead to significant changes in vegetation structure and disrupt nutrient cycling. In addition to direct consumption, these species can introduce novel disturbances not present in native ecosystems, such as trampling vegetation and modifying habitats. These disturbances can result in ecological impacts that often exceed those caused by herbivory alone, leading to profound changes in forest structure, biodiversity and overall ecosystem health (Wardle & Peltzer, 2017).
