Insects are responsible for significant losses to the world's crop production. Not all insects are pests, but many are harmful to crops, forest trees, livestock and humans. One major reason for the occurrence of these pests is the expansion of monocultures in large areas at the expense of natural habitats and diverse plants, with crops and trees selected for their large size, high yield and economic value. This provides a highly conducive environment for herbivorous insects. In addition to agroecosystem-based integrated management practices during production, good post-harvest management and storage conditions are important in reducing losses caused by insect infestation in agriculture (FAO, no date).
A detailed glossary of phytosanitary terms was developed for the International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures. It was produced by the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Examples of relevant terms for insect pest infestation are given below (FAO, 2024):
- Biological control agent: A natural enemy, antagonist or competitor, or another organism, used for pest control.
- Incidence (of a pest): Proportion or number of units in which a pest is present in a sample, consignment, field or other defined population.
- Incursion: An isolated population of a pest recently detected in an area, not known to be established, but expected to survive for the immediate future.
- Infestation (of a commodity): Presence in a commodity of a living pest of the plant or plant product concerned. Infestation includes infection.
- Introduction (of a pest): The entry of a pest resulting in its establishment in the environment.
- Official control: The active enforcement of mandatory phytosanitary regulations and the application of mandatory phytosanitary procedures with the objective of eradication or containment of quarantine pests or the management of regulated non-quarantine pests.
- Outbreak: A recently detected pest population, including an incursion, or a sudden significant increase of an established pest population in an area.
- Pest: Any species, strain or biotype of plant, animal or pathogenic agent injurious to plants or plant products. Note: In the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), 'plant pest' is sometimes used for the term 'pest' (FAO, 2024).Insect pest infestations can devastate not only the crops but also the forests. For example, Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire, Family Buprestidae, order Coleoptera was established in 1888 by Fairmaire. Agrilus is regarded to be the most speciose genera in the animal kingdom with more than 3000 recorded species (Kelnarova et al., 2019). The emerald Ash borer is an East Asian (China, Japan, Korea and Mongolia) wood-boring beetle. It was first observed on Fraxinus trees in the USA and quickly spread to some provinces of Canada. The pest was reported in the EPPO region - in the European part of Russia - in 2003 and later detections were made in eastern Ukraine in 2019 (Orlova-Bienkowskaja et al., 2020). Since its arrival in North America, A. planipennis has killed tens of millions of its ash trees, Fraxinus spp. and Chionanthus virginicus (Fringetree). This invasive insect pest has been introduced through plant material of host into EU member states and poses a serious threat to the ecological and economic values of forest resources. Larvae feed on the phloem of infested ash causing extensive dieback and tree death. The beetle requires one year to complete one generation or two years in colder climates. Adults are found in spring and summer (EFSA, 2023).

## Drivers

The agriculture and forestry sectors face many risks, such as climate and market volatility, pests and diseases, extreme weather events, and an ever-increasing number of protracted crises and conflicts. Issues around outbreaks of animal and plant pests and diseases are of major concern due to their role in biological disasters and in many food chain emergencies.
Favourable climatic conditions, disruption of ecosystems and negligence of crop/forest hygiene contribute to growth in insect populations which can cause substantial damage regularly. In many cases, the long-distance spread of insects results from the transportation of infested goods.
Higher temperatures, severe and extreme weather events and drought stress can all result in reduced vigour of trees, making them more vulnerable to outbreaks of native and introduced pests and diseases. For example, the dieback of millions of hectares of pine forests caused by outbreaks of native bark beetles in Central America, Europe and North America is associated with climate change, impacts of extreme weather events and, in some cases, inadequate forest management practices (FAO, 2020a).

## Impacts

The food chain is under continuous threat with an alarming increase in the number of outbreaks of transboundary animal and plant pests and diseases. Crop pests, forest pests and animal diseases are among the costliest disasters in Africa – more so than in Latin America and Asia – accounting for over USD 6 billion in agricultural loss between 2005 and 2015, with insect pests ravaging up to 85 million hectares of forests, mainly in temperate North America (FAO, 2018). 
There are over a million species of insects. These include some key species causing direct damage to crops, and natural vegetation such as locusts, grasshoppers, armyworms and fruit flies as well as those that also function as vectors for the transmission of plant disease agents such as white flies, aphids, spittlebugs and mealybugs (FAO, 2021). 
The most recent global-scale insect pest infestation is caused by fall armyworm (FAW) spreading to almost the whole of Africa and south and southeast Asia following its jump from Latin America to Africa in 2016. It is currently causing damage to millions of hectares, particularly on maize but also other crops, creating significant food security risks. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has launched a Global Action for FAW Control to facilitate international collaboration to combat the insect (FAO, 2020b). 
Insect pest infestations may cause food security challenges especially if the staple food crops are affected. They can also result in market or price instability. In certain cases, such infestations can cause severe food insecurity as in the case of desert locust upsurges in the Horn of Africa and Yemen in 2020-21 (FAO, 2022). Similarly, the rapid expansion of fall armyworms in Africa and Asia has put many countries in difficult positions to protect crops, particularly of smallholder farmers. 
In addition to the impact on food security, insect pest infestations can also devastate natural landscapes. Other implications on local populations can include local conflicts or migration due to shortages in severe cases, happen in severe locust upsurges. Furthermore, in certain cases, insecticide sprays can have implications concerning the health of local habitants.

## Metrics

Invasive insect species impact can be measured using various metrics, including landscape metrics, functional diversity, and relative impact potential. Landscape metrics like habitat patch aggregation and shape complexity can be used to assess the effects of habitat fragmentation on invasive insect spread. Functional diversity metrics, such as functional richness and evenness, can help understand the impact of invasive insects on native plant communities. For example, the Relative Impact Potential (RIP) metric combines the per capita effects of invaders with their abundance to predict their likelihood and degree of ecological impact (Dickey et al., 2020).

## Multi-Hazard Context

The figure below summarises common interactions between insect pest infestations and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.

## Risk Management

Following principles of sustainable plant production, sustainable forest management and integrated pest management practices are the best approach for control, focusing on diversified production systems, regular surveillance, preparedness before potential outbreaks, and a rapid response to prevent escalation to unmanageable scales (Guzewich et al., 1997). 
Improving national capacities in preparedness, contingency planning, surveillance and rapid response is crucial for preventing infestations and mitigating their impact. Likewise, international cooperation, data sharing and knowledge exchange are essential for addressing transboundary infestations and upsurges. Good examples of international collaboration include risk-informed response to the expansion of fall armyworm across Africa and Asia as well the desert locusts upsurge in 2020-21. FAO has developed and implemented several global initiatives to address these challenges (FAO, 2020c). In the case of desert locusts, collective efforts by FAO, governments and partners averted 4.5 million tonnes of crop losses, saved 900 million litres of milk production and secured food for nearly 42 million people (FAO, 2022). 
Post-disaster needs assessment (PDNA) is designed to evaluate immediate needs for recovery and restoration for better disaster response. The focus of this mission, however, is on estimating socioeconomic impact; and currently does not take into account longer-term damage and loss caused to natural environments and forests. In addition, damage caused by small-scale fires, small windthrow events, and localised pest infestations remains largely unreported, despite meeting the universally established definition of a disaster (FAO, 2018). 
Regarding insect pest infestations in forests, much of what is currently known about the damage and its assessment is in the form of research reports on the application of remote sensing and does not constitute a solid basis for a rigorous sector-specific assessment (FAO, 2018). In the case of Emerald Ash Borer infestations, the spread of the insect imposes important biodiversity losses and substantial costs on forestry and urban management. This affects forest-dependent communities whose incomes are directly tied to the health and productivity of forest ecosystems. As ash trees decline, industries such as logging, woodworking, and nurseries suffer, leading to reduced income for those who rely on these activities. Additionally, non-timber forest products, like nuts and medicinal plants which thrive under the canopy of ash trees, are also affected, further impacting vital ecosystem services for rural communities. 
International knowledge sharing and collaboration is critical for establishing early warning communications. At global level, the pest reporting system of IPPC can be considered the most official resource for reports of the occurrence of quarantine plant pests including diseases (IPPC, 2025). Although such reports are deposited well after the establishment of a pest, they still can serve as early warning resources for other affected countries. One of the most efficient functioning monitoring and early warning systems is the desert locust monitoring system operated by FAO. The system is supported by three commissions (Western Region, Central Region and Southwest Asia) as well as the desert locust control committee (DLCC) (FAO, 2025a). The system utilizes a network of concerned countries that run surveys and share data over satellite tools with the Desert Locust Information System (DLIS) operating since 1978 (FAO, 2025b), and is housed at the headquarters of FAO. Data collected is analysed together with geospatial and meteorological data, helping monitor the overall situation and produce forecasts and early warnings for potential outbreaks which are shared publicly with the concerned countries. Similar tools are currently being developed for locust monitoring in Central Asia and Caucasus (FAO, 2025c), for the monitoring of fall armyworm at the global level (FAO, 2025d). At regional scale, a monitoring tool was developed for red palm weevil monitoring in the Near East. 
Regarding the emerald ash borer, infested trees show distinctive symptoms and signs, but due to their late appearance, surveillance based on symptoms is not suited for detection at low insect densities. The use of traps baited with attractants targeting adult beetles is an effective method to detect the pest at the early stages of infestation and is the recommended approach for implementing surveillance within the EU. (EFSA, 2023).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

The section and the table below offer an overview of monitoring for insect pest infestations. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | At global level, the pest reporting system of IPPC can be considered the most official resource for reports of the occurrence of quarantine plant pests including diseases (IPPC, 2025). Although in most cases such reports are deposited well after the establishment of a pest, these can be considered as early warning resources for other concerned countries. In this respect, the most efficiently functioning monitoring and early warning system is the desert locust monitoring system operated by FAO. The system is run by the Desert Locust Information Service (DLIS) and supported by three commissions (Western Region, Central Region and Southwest Asia) as well as the desert locust control committee (DLCC) (FAO, 2025a).
 | How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast? | The system utilizes a network of concerned countries that run surveys and share data over satellite tools with the Desert Locust Information Service (DLIS) operating since 1978 (FAO, 2025b), and housed at the headquarters of FAO, where the data is analysed together with geospatial and meteorological data. Analysis helps monitoring of the overall situation and production of forecasts and early warning for potential outbreaks to be shared with the concerned countries publicly. Other insects are monitored through official reports of countries, network communications, direct communications and public news. The pest reporting system and the IPPC facilitate the monitoring of officially reported pests (IPPC, 2025a, b)
Several monitoring systems focus on plant pests and diseases particularly at the regional level, such as those in Europe (Peter et al., 2011) and North America (Meissner et al., 2015).
