Marine toxins are primarily produced by algae or bacteria and are concentrated in contaminated fishery and aquaculture products. When people consume these contaminated products, depending on the toxin, the symptoms can be diarrheic, paralytic, amnesic, or neurologic, some of which result in high mortality and long-term morbidity (Sobel and Painter, 2005).
Routine clinical diagnostic tests are not available for these toxins; diagnosis is based on clinical presentation and a history of eating fishery and aquaculture products in the preceding 24 hours (Sobel and Painter, 2005). There is no antidote for any of the marine toxins, and supportive care is the mainstay of treatment. Paralytic shellfish poisoning, and puffer fish poisoning can cause death within hours of consuming the toxins and may require immediate intensive care (Sobel and Painter, 2005).
A Joint FAO/IOC/WHO expert meeting classified the toxins into eight groups based on their chemical structure (FAO/WHO, 2016): the Azaspiracid (AZA) group, Brevetoxin group, Cyclic Imines group, Domoic Acid (DA) group, Okadaic Acid (OA) group, Pectenotoxin (PTX) group, Saxitoxin (STX) group, and Yessotoxin (YTX) group.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) reports that they can also be classified by the type of poisoning they cause (FAO, 2004):
Paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) (FAO, 2004): PSP poisoning in humans is caused by ingestion of shellfish containing PSP toxins, which accumulate by shellfish grazing on algae producing these toxins.
- Symptoms: slight tingling or numbness to complete respiratory paralysis.
- In fatal cases, respiratory paralysis occurs within 2 to 12 hours of consuming the PSP-contaminated food.Diarrhoeic shellfish poisoning (DSP) (FAO, 2004): In humans, DSP poisoning is caused by the ingestion of contaminated bivalves such as mussels, scallops, oysters or clams. The fat-soluble DSP toxins accumulate in the fatty tissue of the bivalves.
- Symptoms: diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain starting 30 minutes to a few hours after ingestion and complete recovery occurs within three days.
- DSP toxins can be divided into different groups depending on chemical structure - the first group, acidic toxins, includes okadaic acid and its derivatives named dynophysistoxins; the second group, neutral toxins, consists of polyether-lactones of the pectenotoxin group; the third group includes a sulphated polyether and its derivatives the yessotoxins .Amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP) (FAO, 2004): In humans, ASP is also known as domoic acid poisoning (DAP) because amnesia is not always present.
- Symptoms: abdominal cramps, vomiting, disorientation and memory loss (amnesia).
- The causative toxin (the excitatory amino acid domoic acid or DA) was produced by the diatom species Pseudo-nitzschia pungens f. multiseries (Nitzschia pungens f. multiseries).Neurotoxic shellfish poisoning (NSP) (FAO, 2004): NSP is caused by polyether brevetoxins produced by the unarmoured dinoflagellate Gymnodinium breve (also called Ptychodiscus breve, since 2000 called Karenia brevis) are toxic to fish, marine mammals, birds and humans, but not to shellfish.
- An unusual feature of G. breve is the formation by wave action of toxic aerosols which can lead to asthma-like symptoms in humans.Azaspiracid shellfish poisoning (AZP) (FAO, 2004): In November 1995, at least eight people in the Netherlands became ill after eating mussels (Mytilus edulis) cultivated at Killary Harbour, Ireland. Although the symptoms resembled those of diarrhoeic shellfish poisoning (DSP), concentrations of the major DSP toxins were very low.
- The known organisms producing DSP toxins were not observed in water samples collected at that time.
- In addition, a slowly progressing paralysis was observed in the mouse assay using the mussel extracts. These neurotoxic symptoms were different from typical DSP toxicity.
- It was then that azaspiracid (formerly called Killary Toxin-3 or KT3) was identified and the new toxic syndrome was called azaspiracid poisoning (AZP).Ciguatoxins causing ciguatera poisoning (CP) (FAO, 2004): The name ciguatera was given by Don Antonio Parra in Cuba in 1787 to intoxication following ingestion of the 'cigua', the Spanish trivial name of a univalve mollusc, Turbo pica, reputed to cause indigestion.
- The term cigua was somehow transferred to an intoxication caused by the ingestion of coral reef fish species.
- The causative toxins, the ciguatoxins, accumulate through the food chain, from small herbivorous fish grazing on the coral reefs to organs of the bigger carnivorous fish that feed on them.
