Submarine gravitational mass movements ('Landslides') commonly occur in fjords, submarine canyons, active river deltas, volcanic islands, and open continental slopes. Evaluating the stability of seabed sediment requires understanding the driving stresses and sediment strength. Driving stresses include gravity, earthquakes, and storm waves. Resisting strength is reduced by pore water and gas pressures, groundwater seepage, rapid sediment deposition, cyclic loading, and human activity. Once slopes have become unstable or have failed, sediment strength may continue to decrease so, following slope failure, the failed mass moves downslope under the influence of gravity.
Submarine gravitational mass movements are classified as mass sediment movements. These include slides (translational and rotational slumps) and mass flows (mudflow, debris flow, liquefaction and turbidity current). If the moving sediment is a viscous fluid, this is termed a mass flow (gravity flow). If the movements are essentially rigid, internally undeformed masses along discrete slip planes, they are termed slides. Movement formed by 'blocks' of failed material rotating along curved slips are called slumps. Movement on a planar surface are termed translational slides. In both types, movement can be fast or slow. Extremely slow movement is called creep (see GH0302). Submarine slides can become mass flows (gravity flows) as the failed mass progressively disintegrates and continuous downslope movement occurs. End members of disintegrating slides have different terms. Debris flows are where the sediment is heterogeneous and may include larger clasts supported by a matrix of fine sediment. Mud flows are predominantly muddy sediment. Turbidity currents involve the downslope transport of a relatively dilute suspension of sediment grains that are supported by an upward component of fluid turbulence. Recent submarine landslide research has: (i) shown that landslides and sediment waves may generate similar deposits, which require careful interpretation; (ii) expanded knowledge of how strength develops in marine sediment; (iii) improved techniques for predicting sediment rheology; and (iv) developed methodologies for mapping and predicting the medium- to large-scale regional occurrence of submarine landslides.
Most submarine gravitational mass movements have multiple causes, which differ significantly from their subaerial counterparts. For example, the gradient of a seabed slope is not always a determining factor, as some of the largest submarine landslides occur on the shallowest slopes. Submarine gravitational mass movements are triggered by an increase in driving stresses, a decrease in sediment strength, or a combination of the two. These triggers include erosion , rapid sedimentation on delta fronts and earthquakes. Erosion is common in deep-sea channels, submarine canyons and other active sediment-transport systems. When seabed surfaces are undercut, this can decrease the stability by increasing shear stress and/or decreasing the shear strength. With earthquakes, the earthquake-induced shear stresses are large relative to sediment shear strength because the earthquake must accelerate all the sediment column including the interstitial water. The sediment shear strength is lowered because it builds up in proportion to the submerged unit weight of the sediment and may be even lower if there are excess pore pressures. The ratio of driving stress to resisting strength is high relative to that on land. Rapid sediment accumulation contributes to failure because most of the weight of newly added sediment is carried by pore-water pressures and the shear stress acting downslope increases more rapidly. The shear stress may also increase because more sediment may be deposited at the head of the sloping surface than at the toe, exceeding the critical slope angle of sediment. In addition, the following may result in failure: retarded sediment shear strength development, increased development of shear stress because of thickness of the sediment body, and increased development of shear stress because of increases in the slope steepness.
