Dolines (sinkholes) are part of the hydrological system that shapes karst landscapes (landscapes resulting from the dissolution of soluble rocks such as chalk, gypsum or limestone). They can be considered in terms of fluid recharge, through-flow and discharge (e.g., springs and discharge points). Their rates of formation reflect the lithological and hydrological conditions (head and discharge).
Groundwater chemistry is important in influencing the rate and distribution of sinkholes. For example, while limestone is only very weakly soluble in water of neutral pH, its solubility increases in acidic conditions, such as due to the input of carbon dioxide from biological transpiration or due to the oxidation of pyrite. Commonly, the mixing of water from different flow paths results in increased dissolution potential. Dissolution may result from both meteoric recharge and groundwater or hypogene fluid flow (water or other fluids and gases) (Dublyansky, 2014).
Sinkholes are classified in accordance with the mode of formation, including but not limited to the following (e.g., Waltham et al., 2004):
- a dissolution sinkhole is formed by dissolutional lowering of the exposed soluble rock surface in and around zones of water recharge to soluble rock;
- a subsidence sinkhole results from recharge water mobilisation of sediment into underlying cavernous rock;
- a suffosion sinkhole is formed due to recharge water mobilisation of sediment through unconsolidated sediment cover over karst;
- a collapse sinkhole results from the collapse of insoluble capping rock into underlying cavernous rock;
- a buried sinkhole is sediment filled;
- a drop out sinkhole is formed rapidly due to soil cover collapse.The triggering of sinkholes can also be the result of either surface or subsurface changes in load or groundwater conditions. Although a natural process, the formation of sinkholes is often accelerated or triggered by human action, for example collapse subsidence associated with mining Sinkholes can also occur in specific non-soluble rock settings such as lava tubes or pseudokarst.
Other types of karst hollow (EPA, 2002) with internal drainage include karst geomorphological features referred to as uvala (a closed depression with multiple recharge points), polje (a closed depression with a wide flat-floored and long axis developed parallel to major structural trends), cockpit (a star-shaped depression with a concave floor and surrounded by steep convex hill slopes) and structurally guided pipes.
Many new sinkholes have been correlated to land-use practices, especially from groundwater pumping and construction and development practices. Sinkholes can also form when natural water-drainage patterns are changed, and new water-diversion systems are developed. Some form when the land surface is changed, such as when industrial and runoff-storage ponds are created. The substantial weight of the new material can trigger an underground collapse of supporting material, causing a sinkhole (USGS, 2018).
The overburden sediments that cover buried cavities in some aquifer systems are delicately balanced by groundwater fluid pressure, whereby the water below ground is actually helping to keep the surface soil in place. Groundwater pumping for urban water supply and for irrigation can produce new sinkholes in sinkhole-prone areas. If pumping results in a lowering of ground- water levels, then underground structural failure, and thus, sinkholes can occur (USGS, 2018).
Broken land drains, water mains and sewerage pipes, increased rainfall, storm events, modified drainage and diverted surface water can all help wash sediment into the underlying soluble rock, causing subsidence. There have been many well documented occurrences of sinkholes forming beneath broken water mains, unlined storm-water culverts and leaking swimming pools (BGS, 2024). In some locations dissolution is driven by the upward movement of groundwater
