The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has monitored the world's forests at 5- to 10-year intervals since 1946. The recent Global Forest Resources Assessments have been produced every five years in an attempt to provide a consistent approach to describing the world's forests and how they are changing (FAO, 2020).
Deforestation includes the permanent reduction of the tree canopy cover below the minimum 10% threshold. It also includes areas of forest converted to agriculture, pasture, water reservoirs, mining, other infrastructure and urban areas. The term specifically excludes areas where the trees have been removed as a result of harvesting or logging, and where the forest is expected to regenerate naturally or with the aid of silvicultural measures. The term also includes areas where, for example, the impact of disturbance, over-utilisation or changing environmental conditions affects the forest to an extent that it cannot sustain a canopy cover above the 10% threshold (FAO, 2023).
Deforestation and forest degradation continue to take place at alarming rates and contribute significantly to the ongoing loss of biodiversity (FAO and UNEP, 2020). Since 1990, it is estimated that 420 million hectares of forest have been lost through conversion to other land uses, although the rate of deforestation has decreased over the past three decades (FAO, 2020a).
Between 2015 and 2020, the rate of deforestation was estimated at 10 million hectares per year, down from 16 million hectares per year in the 1990s. The area of primary forest worldwide has decreased by over 80 million hectares since 1990 (FAO, 2020).
Agricultural expansion continues to be the main driver of deforestation and forest degradation and the associated loss of forest biodiversity. Large-scale commercial agriculture (primarily cattle ranching and cultivation of soya bean and oil palm) accounted for 40% of tropical deforestation between 2000 and 2010, and local subsistence agriculture for another 33% (FAO & UNEP, 2020).
