Aquatic food makes an important contribution to human health and development as an essential source of high-quality proteins, vitamins and micronutrients. Global aquaculture production is now a USD 157 billion industry, with USD 20.5 billion of this total representing the production of molluscs for food in the marine environment. The largest share of this represents the culture of bivalves such as oysters, clams and scallops. Mollusc culture is a well-developed industry in many countries, notably in the northern hemisphere, such as the USA, Canada, Japan, Korea, France, Spain and the Netherlands (Carnegie et al., 2016).
Oysters are subject to a number of diseases, which can impact the local population and reduce harvests in a commercial setup.
The agents causing oyster diseases do not pose any direct human health implications. However, oysters could potentially pose a health concern for humans in cases where they contain high levels of Vibrio spp. (V. parahaemolyticus, V. vulnificus, and choleragenic, V. cholera) and are consumed raw, or where the oysters are produced in an area containing biotoxin or heavy metal contamination (e.g., lead) (WHO, 2005). Bivalve molluscs are filter feeders; therefore, they are susceptible to picking up and accumulating toxins, and chemical or bacteriological contaminants from their environment. By filtering a great quantity of water, they may bioaccumulate a high number of microorganisms in their tissues that can be considered infectious for humans and higher vertebrates (Zannella et al., 2017). The causative pathogens live in aquatic environments in both tropical and temperate zones. High temperatures and salinities favour the proliferation of some of the pathogens.
Epizootic diseases have been shown to cause catastrophic mortality among marine bivalves, which can severely affect fisheries and aquaculture activities worldwide. Some of these diseases have become a serious constraint on the development and sustainability of shellfish farming and fishing. Currently, the main cause of epizootic outbreaks is thought to be the transfer of infectious agents through the transport of live shellfish.
Severe outbreaks have resulted in significant economic destruction, with some outbreaks essentially causing the collapse of entire industries. For instance, epizootics of protistan parasites Haplosporidium nelsoni in the 1950s to 1960s and Perkinsus marinus in the 1980s to 1990s devastated the planting industry for oyster Crassostrea virginica in the US mid-Atlantic (Carnegie et al., 2016).
Illness in humans is linked to the consumption of raw oysters.
