Human
Leptospires are bacteria which can be either pathogenic (i.e., having the potential to cause disease in animals and humans) or saprophytic (i.e., free-living and generally considered not to cause disease (WHO SEARO, no date a).
Pathogenic leptospires are maintained in nature in the renal tubules of certain animals. Saprophytic leptospires are found in many types of wet or humid environments ranging from surface waters and moist soil to tap water. Saprophytic halophilic (salt-loving) leptospires are found in seawater (WHO & ILS, 2003).
Humans usually acquire leptospirosis through direct contact with the urine of infected animals or a urine-contaminated environment. Human-to-human transmission occurs only very rarely. The bacteria enter the body through cuts or abrasions on the skin, or the mucous membranes of the mouth, nose and eyes. (WHO, no date a).
Leptospirosis occurs worldwide but is most common in tropical and subtropical areas with high rainfall. Leptospirosis is a disease of epidemic potential, especially after heavy rainfall or flooding. Cases have been reported in most countries of the Americas and outbreaks have been reported in Brazil, Nicaragua, Guyana and several other Latin American countries. The majority of reported cases have severe manifestations, for which mortality is greater than 10%. Outbreaks can be associated with floods and hurricanes (WHO, no date b).
Animal
Leptospira is globally enzootic, but the disease is more frequently seen in warm and moist environments. Leptospira serovars are known to cause disease in mammals and have been isolated from amphibians. Some serovars have also been isolated from invertebrates, reptiles, and birds. A variety of Leptospira vaccines are available for domestic animals, including livestock. Most countries maintain a list of approved veterinary vaccines for use. For specific regulations, consult the country's veterinary authorities. Virtually all mammals are vulnerable to pathogenic Leptospira serovars to varying degrees. In incidental hosts, a serious disease with high tissue burdens and robust antibody responses can be seen (WOAH, 2020).
