Solar flares predominantly occur in active regions on the Sun, which are characterized by the presence of intense magnetic fields, often associated with sunspot groups. As these magnetic fields undergo changes and evolve, they can reach a state of instability, resulting in the release of energy in various forms. One of the primary manifestations of this energy release is observed as solar flares, which involve the emission of electromagnetic radiation.
Flares are more likely to occur during periods of high solar activity and are often accompanied by coronal mass ejections (CME).
Flares are classified based on their intensity, primarily determined by the X-ray brightness, and measured in the 1-8 Å band (0.1-0.8 nm). There are five categories of flares, ranging from the weakest to the strongest: A, B, C, M, and X (Hanslmeier, 2007; Schrijver, 2009). Information regarding the intensity of flares is obtained from X-ray and Extreme UV sensors installed on GOES satellites (Thiemann et al., 2019; Machol et al., 2020).
Under favourable observation conditions, when the corresponding active region on the Sun is facing Earth, an intense flare, typically of X-class and occasionally M-class, can lead to significant disturbances in the ionosphere on the sunlit side of Earth. These disturbances can cause signal distortions and radio fadeouts due to increased absorption of radio waves in the lower ionosphere, specifically the D region and lower E region.
Under regular conditions, high-frequency (HF) radio waves support long-distance communication by refracting through the upper layers of the ionosphere. However, during a powerful solar flare, the ionization increases in the lower ionosphere, particularly in its D and lower E regions. This phenomenon can lead to the degradation or complete absorption of HF radio signals, resulting in a radio fadeout that predominantly affects the 3 to 30 MHz frequency band.
Radio bursts are associated with solar flares. The delay in registration of its different radio frequencies at Earth's orbit is due to the outward movement of the source. Large bursts last 10 to 20 minutes on average. Longer radio noise storms of persistent and variable high radiation levels originate in sunspot groups, areas of large, intense magnetic fields. A Solar Radio Burst (SRB) could influence the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) signals through direct radio wave interferences.
