Despite wide use, there is no commonly used definition for 'civil unrest', although related terms, such as riot, terrorism, protest and violent disorder are defined in some national legislation. Academic and non-legal definitions are available, as outlined below. Some authors emphasise the explicit non-state affiliation in their definition of 'civil' unrest, while others are less clear about the state and non-state contribution. An important distinction is that civil unrest is largely understood to take place in times of peace (Kalyvas, 2000), although not exclusively as noted below by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Instances of civil unrest can take place over short or long timeframes and are widely although not exclusively, understood to be urban acts (Kalyvas, 2000).
Everyone has the right to peaceful assembly, as enshrined by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Art. 20(1)) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Art. 21), which imposes a corresponding obligation on States parties to respect and ensure its exercise, without discrimination (General Comment No. 37 (2020)).
While acts such as peaceful protests can have no or relatively minimal disturbance, violent riots can result in deaths, and destruction of property and infrastructure (Evans, 1993; Braha, 2012). In the case of civil unrest in Los Angeles in 1992, for example, violence resulted in 53 deaths, 2325 reported injuries and more than USD 735 million in damage to buildings (Evans, 1993).
Civil unrest is generally understood to include violent and non-violent group acts such as riots, protests, and isolated and sporadic acts of violence (Braha, 2012; Basedau et al., 2018). The perceived or actual motivation for the act is often emphasised when describing collective action as civil unrest, alongside a clash with authority (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014). Frequently cited explanations include tension or dissatisfaction over political, economic or social changes/conditions (Kalyvas, 2000). According to Basedau et al. (2018:5), 'One can conceptualize civil unrest as a special form of collective action and people need to be motivated and able to exert it.' Braha (2012) defined civil unrest as a 'form of collective human dynamics, which has led to major transitions of societies in modern history', while Oncevay et al. (2020) defined it as 'public manifestations, where people demonstrate their position for different causes'.
According to Melzer (2009), as part of guidance from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on International Humanitarian Law, civil unrest can also take place in times of armed conflict:
"During armed conflict, political demonstrations, riots, and other forms of civil unrest are often marked by high levels of violence and are sometimes responded to with military force. In fact, civil unrest may […] even benefit the general war effort of a party to the conflict by undermining the territorial authority and control of another party through political pressure, economic insecurity, destruction and disorder. It is therefore important to distinguish direct participation in hostilities - which is specifically designed to support a party to an armed conflict against another - from violent forms of civil unrest, the primary purpose of which is to express dissatisfaction with the territorial or detaining authorities."

## Drivers

Civil unrest may be triggered by the occurrence of various other hazards, or an ineffective or inefficient response to their occurrence, in particular in the case of other societal hazards, such as those involving violence, conflict or financial shock, but also various environmental, technological and other hazards.

## Impacts

All kinds of civil unrest and protest activity remain a problem. Contributing factors such as high inflation, wealth inequality, food and fuel prices, climate anxieties and concerns about civil liberties or perceived assaults on democracy have not eased. Civil unrest has a wide range of negative impacts, affecting businesses, individuals, and the broader community. These impacts can include physical damage to property, economic losses, psychological distress, and a reduction in social engagement (Allianz, 2025).

## Metrics

Given the lack of a single definition, it is unsurprising that there are no commonly agreed metrics or numerical limits for the term. Attempts have been made to forecast civil unrest using open source indicators (such as Ramakrishnan et al., 2014), although the most commonly used conflict data sets do not define civil unrest. For example, the term is not commonly defined or used by the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED, 2019) or the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO). ACLED does however offer definitions for different forms of violent and non-violent action which could all fall under the definition of civil unrest, such as protest and riot. Similarly, the Social Conflict Database (SCAD, 2017) does not provide a single definition for civil unrest but offers several definitions which may be classed as forms of civil unrest. These are: organised demonstration; spontaneous demonstration; organised violent riot; spontaneous violent riot; general strike; and limited strike.
Of the numerous challenges in defining and measuring civil unrest, a particular challenge is translation into standard equivalents in other languages, and the inclusion/exclusion of the ‘civil’ aspect. For example, in Spanish it can be translated as ‘guerra’ while others translate it is as ‘revueltas civiles’, ‘disturbios civiles’ or as ‘descontento social’ only. French offers a range of similar translations. The transnational aspects of civil unrest also seem to be lacking.

## Multi-Hazard Context

Civil unrest in contemporary society, in much of the world, is reported to be evolving rapidly, likely contributing to current trends and having important implications for the direction of the trends going into the future. Rapid shifts that may be relevant to social and population health include the increasing ageing population, widespread adoption of remote working, increased automation, economic strain and inequity, migration and mobility, mental health crisis among youth, rise in xenophobia, civil and political unrest, and environmental crises, all of which may potentially exacerbate trends concerning social connection. These trends of declining social connection, combined with the evidence on the bidirectional associations with mental and physical morbidities, point to an urgent need to take action. Because multiple factors have been contributing to these trends, building over decades, simply returning to pre‐pandemic levels of connection or reducing time on social media may only bring limited benefits (Holt-Lunstad, 2024).

## Risk Management

Documented operational risk management for civil unrest includes preparedness and response. The public health sector offers frameworks for violence prevention interventions as well as responses, as documented by the World Health Organization (Krug et al., 2002). 
Widespread civil unrest, with mass gatherings of protestors, has in some instances resulted in criminal damage and business disruption. Protests are by nature unpredictable, but steps can be taken by organisations to help mitigate the risk. Suggested steps might include reviewing work practices if protests are anticipated and asking staff to avoid going into areas where protests may occur, possibly switching to virtual meetings and to considering rescheduling any planned events (Ecclesiastical, 2024). 
Successful outcomes are generally regarded as cessation of physical violence and restoration of civil rights.

## Monitoring and Early Warning

Within the United Nations system, various treaty-based and UN Charter-based human rights monitoring mechanisms are relevant to contexts where civil unrest may occur, and early warning signs can be identified. The charter-based bodies include the Human Rights Council, Special Procedures (currently including 45 thematic mandates and 13 country mandates), the Universal Periodic Review and Independent Investigations. Treaty bodies include the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD), Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), Human Rights Committee (CCPR), Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), Committee against Torture (CAT), Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC), Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW), Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (SPT), Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), and Committee on Enforced Disappearances (CED). Various early warning systems also exist at regional levels, including under the frameworks of the African Union, the Organization of American States, and the Council of Europe.
