Under light wind, stable and humid conditions, if the air near the ground cools sufficiently, water vapour in the air may condense into tiny water droplets. These droplets reduce the visibility near ground level. This phenomenon is called fog (Hong Kong Observatory, 2019).
Fog differs from cloud only in that its base is at the Earth's surface while the cloud base is above the Earth's surface. When composed of ice crystals, it is termed ice fog (WMO, 2017). Visibility reduction in fog depends on the concentration of cloud condensation nuclei and the resulting distribution of droplet sizes. According to the American Meteorological Society (AMS) weather observing practice, fog that hides less than 0.6 of the sky is called ground fog. If fog is so shallow that it is not an obstruction to vision at a height of 6 feet above the surface, it is called simply shallow fog (AMS, 2012).
Fog is easily distinguished from haze by its higher relative humidity (near 100%, having physiologically appreciable dampness) and grey colour. Haze does not contain activated droplets larger than the critical size according to Köhler theory (AMS, 2012).
Mist may be considered an intermediate between fog and haze; its particles are smaller (a few microns maximum), it has lower relative humidity than fog, and does not obstruct visibility to the same extent (AMS, 2012).
There is no distinct line, however, between any of these categories. Near industrial areas, fog is often mixed with smoke, and this combination has been known as smog. However, fog droplets are usually absent in photochemical smog, which only contains inactivated haze droplets (AMS, 2012).
In aviation weather observations, fog is encoded F, and ground fog GF (AMS, 2012).
