Benzene (ICSC 0015, 2016) melts at 5.5°C and boils at 80.1°C; and has a high vapour pressure, which causes it to evaporate rapidly at room temperature, and is highly flammable. Methane and other light hydrocarbons exhibit similar properties. Benzene is slightly soluble in water but miscible with most other organic solvents (IPCS, 1993).
Benzene is used as a solvent in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. It also occurs naturally in petroleum products (e.g., crude oil and gasoline) at levels up to 4 g/L. The primary route of benzene exposure and subsequent toxicity is via inhalation. The highest exposures have typically been in the workplace – for example, in industries that make or use benzene. The general population may be exposed through the inhalation of contaminated air, particularly in areas of heavy automobile traffic, gas stations and areas near industrial sources. Other sources include cigarette smoking, second-hand smoke, off-gassing from building material and structural fires. People also may be exposed to benzene in contaminated drinking water and some foods (WHO, 2019).
The compulsory introduction of catalytic converters on car exhausts and legislation to reduce benzene levels in car fuels has contributed to a reduction of benzene emissions. Other interventions to prevent or reduce exposures to airborne benzene include promoting the use of alternative solvents in industrial processes, developing and implementing policies and legislation to remove benzene from consumer products, discouraging domestic use of benzene-containing products, promoting building codes requiring detached garages, and implementing the World Health Organization (WHO) Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO, 2003), including providing for protection from exposure to tobacco smoke in workplaces and public areas.
