There is a conventional classification of dzud types based on direct factors contributing to conditions that prevent animals from grazing for consecutive days, finally resulting in their starvation. These include (Fernandez-Gimenez et al., 2011):
- White dzud: defined as conditions during which grasses that grow during the summer and decay during the subsequent cold season are covered by deep snow, preventing grazing. The snow depth during these conditions substantially exceeds plant height. This is the most common and disastrous dzud type.
- Iron (or glass) dzud: happens when grasses are covered with impenetrable ice that is produced through melted and refrozen snow (most likely occurring during spring and autumn).
- Black dzud: refers to freezing temperatures and lack of snow in winter (essential for livestock and human water) and limited forage/pasture due to preceding summer drought.
- Storm and cold dzuds: both tend to result from strong winds and blizzard, and cold surge conditions. These weather patterns reduce the intake of pasture by livestock, which is determined by the availability of phytomass (i.e., not covered by snow and ice) and grazing time.
- Hoof dzud: is primarily associated with lack of pasture, often caused by overgrazing. This may occur when an excessive number of animals are concentrated in relatively good but limited pasturelands. A Dzud can occur as a cascading hazard to succeeding climatic hazards such as summer drought.A combined (or multiple) dzud occurs when two or more of the above types of dzud occur together.
Note: human-induced vulnerability, including inadequate pasture management, lack of herder experience, poverty, and insufficient winter preparedness can increase the risks of dzud impacts.
