The constantly evolving nature of the influenza virus makes influenza among the top few infectious hazards with significant impact.
At least five influenza pandemics have occurred at irregular intervals over the past 100 years and have varied widely in their severity.
Historically the most catastrophic influenza pandemic occurred in 1918-1920 (the so-called "Spanish Flu") and killed an estimated 50 million people worldwide. The other two influenza pandemics of the 20th century (in 1957 and 1968) each killed upwards of one million people (WHO EURO, no date).
In 1996, the highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 virus was first identified in domestic waterfowl in Southern China. The virus is named A/goose/Guangdong/1/1996. In 1997, H5N1 poultry outbreaks happened in China and Hong Kong with 18 associated human cases (6 deaths) in Hong Kong. This virus would go on to cause more than 860 human infections with a greater than 50% death rate. The virus spread quietly and was detected by Korea in imported duck meat from China in 2003 (CDC, 2024). A human case was confirmed in Vietnam on 13 January 2004 (WHO, 2004) and after Vietnam reported the case, countries reported HPAI one after another.
The 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic is estimated to have caused up to 575 000 deaths, not only among those at a higher risk of complications but also in otherwise healthy individuals. Due to the nature of influenza viruses, a future influenza pandemic is inevitable and preparedness for it is vital. Since the re-emergence of highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) in 2002-2003, the world has accelerated its preparations for the next influenza pandemic (WHO, no date; WHO EURO, no date).
However, in 2019, a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) emerged and caused the COVID-19 pandemic. The subsequent enormous human, societal and economic costs provided a stark reminder that while the threat of an influenza pandemic remains very real, the threats posed by other respiratory viruses must also remain very much on our radar, and corresponding preparedness efforts that go beyond influenza preparedness must now be recognized as absolutely vital (WHO, no date).
However, in 2019, a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) emerged and caused the COVID-19 pandemic. The subsequent enormous human, societal and economic costs provided a stark reminder that while the threat of an influenza pandemic remains very real, the threats posed by other respiratory viruses must also remain very much on our radar, and corresponding preparedness efforts that go beyond influenza preparedness must now be recognized as absolutely vital.
The current status of knowledge and technology means that predicting the next influenza pandemic - when, where, which virus strain, and how severe it will be - is impossible. Consequently, pandemic vaccines cannot be developed before the pandemic virus emerges. The World Health Organisation (WHO) public health research agenda for influenza as an innovative research mechanism is key to inform and advance pandemic influenza preparedness (WHO, 2018).
WHO, with support from numerous experts around the world, has continued to develop and update its comprehensive range of guidelines, tools and other resources to support countries in their preparedness activities for influenza pandemics and for pandemics caused by other respiratory viruses. Such resources now include (WHO, no date):
- Influenza pandemic preparedness planning
- Pandemic preparedness planning for influenza and other respiratory virus threat
- Public health and social measures (PHSM) during a pandemic
- Surveillance during an influenza pandemic.

## Drivers

A pandemic occurs when an influenza virus emerges to which there is little or no immunity in the global human population and which can transmit efficiently among people. The pandemic virus can be a virus strain jumping directly from animals or reassorted from animal viruses with or without human seasonal viruses (WHO, no date a; WHO EURO, no date).

## Impacts

Influenza pandemics, whether mild, moderate or severe, affect a large proportion of the global population, which puts significant strains on health and other essential services and may result in significant economic losses (WHO, no date a). 
WHO recommends annual vaccination for high-risk groups including health care workers. People should ideally get vaccinated just before the influenza season begins for the most effective coverage, although getting vaccinated at any time during the influenza season can still help prevent flu infections. The best way to avoid getting the flu is to get the flu vaccine every year. Influenza viruses evolve constantly, and twice a year WHO makes recommendations to update the vaccine compositions. For the 2016-2017 northern hemisphere influenza season, the vaccine formulation was updated in February 2016 to contain two type A viruses (H1N1 and H3N2), and a type B virus (WHO, 2020). 
In 2018, the world observed the centenary of the start of the 1918–1919 influenza pandemic. Its estimated toll of up to 50 million deaths exceeded that of the First World War, resulting in a dramatic decline in life expectancy in many countries at the time of the pandemic. Its impact led to fundamental changes in public health and health-care systems, including centralized and consolidated health-care, greater recognition of the role of socioeconomics in health, and the coordination of public health at national and global levels. 
Since the 1918–1919 pandemic, there has been significant progress in medical science, including the development of influenza vaccines, antiviral drugs and better diagnostics. Subsequent pandemics occurred in 1957–1958, 1968–1969 and 2009–2010, resulting in 1–4 million, 1–4 million and 100,000–400,000 deaths, respectively. 
The pandemic (H1N1) 2009 caused significant deaths, particularly in those aged under 65 years; it also tested national health response systems, in particular, the pandemic vaccine response capacity) and exposed weaknesses in those systems. It reiterated that influenza viruses of both avian and swine origin can cause a pandemic, and it underscored the importance of intersectoral collaboration for pandemic preparedness. 
Although it is impossible to predict when the next pandemic might occur, its occurrence is considered inevitable, and it could well occur during the time frame of this strategy. Given increased economic globalization, urbanization and mobility, the next pandemic will spread further and faster and could lead to significant disruptions. Despite significant medical advances over the past 100 years, there will still be populations that have limited access to care and will be likely to experience high mortality rates during a pandemic.

## Metrics

In 2011, the IHR Review Committee on Pandemic Influenza (H1N1) 2009 recommended WHO develop and apply measures that can be used to assess the severity of every influenza epidemic: "By applying, evaluating and refining tools to measure severity every year, WHO and Member States can be better prepared to assess severity in the next pandemic".
The updated WHO pandemic influenza severity assessment (PISA) framework set out in this document provides a systematic approach for interpreting data collected through existing surveillance systems and improving their usefulness for risk communication and decision-making. The approach enables the severity of current influenza and syndromic respiratory illness activity to be assessed relative to previous years by using historical data to set thresholds that then allow for the qualitative categorization of such activity. PISA is designed to be implemented continuously based on stable/routine reporting systems, enabling activity during epidemic and pandemic periods to be compared. Information to assess severity especially early and throughout the course of a pandemic will also be provided through investigations, studies and modelling (WHO, 2024a).

## Multi-Hazard Context

Not Applicable.

## Risk Management

Timely detection, characterisation and sharing of information about the pandemic virus directly affects the outcome of all downstream responses. The WHO GISRS is the foundation of such an operation. In an influenza pandemic, the virus is likely to spread rapidly. Rapid development, production and deployment of vaccines are critical to limit the potential impact on populations and essential services. Access to the appropriate vaccine in the early phases of a pandemic is greatly influenced by global production capacity and the lead time required to produce influenza vaccines (WHO, no date a). 
As an influenza pandemic may last months or even years, it may require a sustained response in the health sector but also in other sectors providing essential services, such as energy and food production (WHO, no date a; WHO; 2025 b). 
The Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Framework, or PIP Framework, is an innovative access and benefit-sharing instrument that seeks to better prepare the world to respond more equitably to the next influenza pandemic. The PIP Framework was adopted on 24 May 2011 by the 194 Member States of WHO, recognizing that an influenza pandemic would be a global challenge, and preparing for it requires a holistic, collective and cooperative approach. WHO implements the PIP Framework in close partnership with Member States and public health laboratories that are specialized in influenza, industry and civil society. The PIP Framework enables the sharing by WHO Member States of influenza viruses with human pandemic potential with the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) and equitable access to vaccines, medicines and other products and technologies. Under the Framework, Member States are expected to share their influenza viruses with pandemic potential (IVPPs) in a rapid, systematic and timely manner with GISRS, a WHO-coordinated global network of public health laboratories. In addition to serving as a virus-sharing platform, GISRS also develops – inter alia – candidate vaccine viruses, and other analyses, materials and information that are shared with Member States and manufacturers of influenza vaccines and other products, such as antivirals and diagnostics (WHO, 2024a). 
Globally coordinated surveillance of influenza, timely sharing of influenza virus data and associated information, and innovative research are key to addressing the problem of influenza. Global influenza surveillance has been conducted through the World Health Organization (WHO) Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) since 1952. GISRS is a system fostering global confidence for over half a century, through effective collaboration and sharing of viruses, data and benefits based on Member States’ commitment to a global public health model (WHO, 2024b). 
The aim of GISRS is to protect people from the threat of influenza by functioning: as a global mechanism of surveillance, preparedness and response for seasonal, pandemic and zoonotic influenza; as a global platform for monitoring influenza epidemiology and disease; and as a global alert for novel influenza viruses and other respiratory pathogens (WHO, 2024b). 
One Health measures to mitigate the risk of pandemic influenza adapting to mammals and humans focus on limiting exposure and preventing spread. Key options for actions include enhancing surveillance targeting humans and animals, ensuring access to rapid diagnostics, promoting collaboration between animal and human sectors, and considering the implementation of preventive measures such as vaccination of poultry. Effective communication with different target audiences should be emphasised, as well as strengthening veterinary infrastructure, enforcing biosecurity measures at farms, and reducing wildlife contact with domestic animals (EFSA & ECDC, 2024).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

Global influenza surveillance has been conducted through WHO's Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) since 1952 (WHO, 2924b). GISRS is a system fostering global confidence and trust for over half a century, through effective collaboration and sharing of viruses, data and benefits based on Member States' commitment to a global public health model.
The mission of GISRS is to protect people from the threat of influenza by continuously functioning as a:
- global mechanism of surveillance, preparedness and response for seasonal, pandemic and zoonotic influenza;
- global platform for monitoring influenza epidemiology and disease; and
- global alert for novel influenza viruses and other respiratory pathogens.The table below offers an overview of monitoring for pandemic influenza. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | WHO, Ministry of Health, FAO Reference Centres, WOAH Reference Centres, CDC
 | 
How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast?
 | FAO empres-i+ https://empres-i.apps.fao.org/diseases
WHO Risk assessments and summaries of influenza at the human-animal interface https://www.who.int/teams/global-influenza-programme/avian-influenza/monthly-risk-assessment-summary (TIPRA)
WHO WPRO https://www.who.int/westernpacific/wpro-emergencies/surveillance/avian-influenza
WOAH WAHIS https://wahis.woah.org/#/event-management
CDC IRAT 
WHO supports countries to conduct all-hazards strategic risk assessment in the contexts of health emergencies and disasters, which results in the development of a country risk profile. Empowered with the country risk profile, inclusive of a seasonal risk calendar, countries can anticipate potential emergencies before they occur to trigger early alerts and inform early actions (WHO, no date b).
WHO's Early Warning, Alert and Response System (EWARS) has been designed to improve disease outbreak detection in emergency settings, such as in countries in conflict or following a natural disaster. It is a simple and cost-effective way to rapidly set up a disease surveillance system. EWARS is deployed during an emergency as an adjunct to the national disease surveillance system. WHO works with Ministries of Health and health sector partners to train local health workers to use the system. After the emergency, EWARS should re-integrate back into the national system (WHO, no date, b).
