Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are spread predominantly by sexual contact, including vaginal, anal and oral sex. Some sexually transmitted diseases can also be transmitted through non-sexual means such as via blood or blood products. Many sexually transmitted diseases, including syphilis, hepatitis B, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), chlamydia, gonorrhoea, herpes, and human papillomavirus (HPV), can also be transmitted from mother to child during pregnancy and childbirth. STIs have a direct impact on sexual and reproductive health through stigmatization, infertility, cancers and pregnancy complications and can increase the risk of HIV. Drug resistance is a major threat to reducing the burden of STIs worldwide (WHO, 2024).
More than 30 different bacteria, viruses and parasites are known to be transmitted through sexual contact, including vaginal, anal and oral sex. Some STIs can also be transmitted from mother-to-child during pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding. Eight pathogens are linked to the greatest incidence of STIs. Of these, 4 are currently curable: syphilis, gonorrhoea, chlamydia and trichomoniasis. The other 4 are viral infections: hepatitis B, herpes simplex virus (HSV), HIV and human papillomavirus (HPV) (WHO, 2024).
In addition, emerging outbreaks of new infections that can be acquired by sexual contact such as mpox, Shigella sonnei, Neisseria meningitidis, Ebola and Zika, as well as re-emergence of neglected STIs such as lymphogranuloma venereum. These herald increasing challenges in the provision of adequate services for STI prevention and control.
