A derecho (pronounced similar to 'deh-REY-cho') is a widespread, long-lived wind storm that is associated with a band of rapidly moving showers or thunderstorms. Although a derecho can produce destruction similar to the strength of tornadoes, the damage is typically directed in one direction along a relatively straight swath. As a result, the term 'straight-line wind damage' is sometimes used to describe derecho damage. By definition, if the wind damage swath extends more than 240 miles (about 400 km) and includes wind gusts of at least 58 mph (93 km/h) or greater along most of its length, then the event may be classified as a derecho (NOAA, 2019).
A derecho is a widespread convectively induced straight-line windstorm. Specifically, the term is defined as any family of particularly damaging downburst clusters produced by a mesoscale convective system (AMS, 2012a). Such systems have sustained bow echoes with book-end vortices and/or rear-inflow jets and can generate considerable damage from straight-line winds. Damage must be incurred either continuously or intermittently over a swath of at least 650 km (~400 miles) and a width of approximately 100 km (~60 miles) or more. The term derecho derives from a Spanish word that can be interpreted as 'straight ahead' or 'direct' and was chosen to distinguish between wind damage caused by tornadoes (AMS, 2012b), which have rotating flow, from straight-line winds.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Storm Prediction Center reports that the types of derecho include: serial derechos, progressive derechos, hybrid derechos and low-point derechos (NOAA, 2018).
