Land degradation is the reduction in the capability of the land to produce benefits from a particular land use under a specified form of land management (FAO, 1999).
More than 60% of human-induced land degradation is happening in agricultural lands (cropland and pastureland). Food production is reduced and the entire agrifood system is under pressure. The restoration of agricultural land is a priority to ensure the achievement of several SDGs, such as food security and land degradation neutrality.
In the soil conservation arena, the terms soil degradation and land degradation are sometimes incorrectly used interchangeably, with soil erosion regarded as synonymous with both. However, there is more to soil degradation than just soil erosion, and land represents a broader concept than simply soil. As with its use in the context of land evaluation (FAO, 1976), the term land refers to all natural resources which contribute to agricultural production, including livestock production and forestry. Land thus covers climate, landforms, water resources, soils and vegetation (including both grassland and forests) (FAO, 1999).
There are a number of interrelated land degradation components, all of which may contribute to a decline in agricultural production. The most important according to Douglas (1994) cited by FAO (1999):
- Soil degradation: decline in the productive capacity of the soil as a result of soil erosion and changes in the hydrological, biological, chemical and physical properties of the soil.
- Vegetation degradation: decline in the quantity and/or quality of the natural biomass and decrease in the vegetative ground cover.
- Water degradation: decline in the quantity and/or quality of both surface and groundwater resources.
- Climate deterioration: changes in the micro- and macro-climatic conditions that increase the risk of crop failure.
- Losses to urban/industrial development: decline in the total area of land used, or with potential, for agricultural production as a result of arable land being converted to urban, industrial and infrastructure uses (FAO, 1999).Examples of causes of different types of land degradation include water erosion, wind erosion, soil fertility decline, waterlogging, salinisation, lowering of the water table, deforestation, forest degradation and rangeland degradation (FAO, 1994).
Soil loss from conventionally tilled land exceeds the rate of soil formation by more than two orders of magnitude (medium confidence). An estimated 3.2 billion people, or a quarter of the world's population, depend directly on land that is being degraded (FAO, 2021).
