Over recent decades, mining has generated considerable wealth, reduced poverty in developing countries, and improved quality of life through the provision of natural resources. Although mining has considerable benefits, this industry can have harmful impacts on people, society, and the environment (Donelly, 2018). The most common mining hazards include but are not limited to ground collapse, subsidence, fault reactivation and fissures, mine water rebound, acid mine water drainage, mine gas emissions, and combustion. Other notable hazards are mining-induced landslides, mining-induced seismicity, waste, dereliction, and contamination. Although potentially foreseeable, mining hazards cannot necessarily be forecast or predicted in terms of their timing, location, duration, magnitude, and extent. Mining hazards can occur in isolation or as groups of hazards occurring simultaneously (Donelly, 2018).
Artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) has experienced substantial growth in recent years, largely due to the increasing value of mineral prices and additional sources of income, particularly in Africa and Latin America. Despite being low in productivity, ASM is an important source of minerals and metals and accounts for approximately 20% of the global gold supply and 20% of the global diamond supply. In 2017, 40.5 million people were estimated to have been involved in this sector. The most recent estimates are for about 9 million ASM operators in Africa and about 54 million people whose livelihoods depend on the sector (IGF, 2017). However, The Africa Minerals Development Centre considers this a 'conservative estimate', citing an important lack of data on ASM, as the activity is often informal and mostly operates illegally in several African countries. The Latin America ASM sector has strict regulations on informal operators and the use of certain substances but has limited capacity to implement these regulations. It is particularly difficult to control informal mining where there are large numbers of miners, such as in Colombia, where about 87% of 4134 Colombian gold mining operations are illegal and 95% of all the gold mines have no environmental permit (IGF, 2017). Perceptions of ASM activity vary from country to country. Stakeholders often tend to vilify artisanal and small-scale mining because of its informal nature and hazardous characteristics, with significant health and safety risks as well as susceptibility to social conflict and human rights violations (Barreto, 2011).
Mining hazards may occur during the exploitation of the mine and differ depending on what is mined and how. For example, underground coal mining may cause subsidence, landslides, fissures, and even hazard chains, seriously damaging the ecological environment (Ma et al., 2022). Gold mining often involves the use of chemicals dangerous for the health of the workers, their community and the surrounding environment, for example through the migration of pollutants into the air, the soil and the water (Liu et al., 2021; Wongsasuluk et al., 2021; Gerson et al., 2022).
During mining, the use of hazardous substances in mining puts the health of miners and their communities at risk - they are exposed, for example, to mercury, zinc vapour, cyanide, or other acids. This is a particular concern in artisanal gold mining, where mercury is frequently deployed and cyanide use is growing. Other health concerns include inhaling dust and fine particles from blasting and drilling processes causing respiratory diseases such as silicosis or pneumoconiosis in men and women, and in the children who often accompany their parents a lack of ear protection to filter noise from equipment such as drills or crushers can cause temporary or permanent hearing loss and speech interference (ILO, 2014).
Concrete actions started in 2018 with a focus on formalisation, establishing gold-buying schemes, capacity building at the national level on mercury-free technologies, awareness raising and knowledge sharing (UNEP, 2019).

## Drivers

The major multi-hazards related to mines include ground collapse and subsidence, sinkholes, mine flooding, water pollution, toxic gas leaks, and explosion risks. Natural hazards such as earthquakes (Senses & Kumral, 2023) and floods (Mason et al., 2013) can exacerbate mining hazards. These multi-hazards can occur sequentially or simultaneously, further amplifying the risks (Wu et al., 2022).
Lack of governance and inappropriate practices may increase the risk of accidents, in particular, at artisanal mining sites (Adu-Baffour et al., 2021).

## Impacts

Mining activities release dust in the surrounding environment, with impacts on the health of surrounding communities (Entwistle et al., 2019) and the environment (Yu & Zahidi, 2023). Underground coal mining releases potentially harmful gases during accidents (Zykov & Filatov, 2018). 
Occupational hazards are a major consequence of mining activities. Although only accounting for 1% of the global workforce, mining is responsible for about 8% of fatal accidents at work. No reliable data exist on injuries, but they are significant, as is the number of workers affected by such disabling occupational diseases as pneumoconiosis, hearing loss and the effects of vibration (ILO, 2015). Mineworkers face a constantly changing combination of workplace circumstances. Some work in an atmosphere without natural light or ventilation, creating voids in the earth by removing material and trying to ensure that there will be no immediate reaction from the surrounding strata. Despite the efforts in many countries, injury and disease among the world’s mineworkers means that, in most countries, mining remains the most hazardous occupation when the number of people exposed to risk is taken into account (ILO, 2015). In some countries, many more people are employed in small-scale, often informal, mining than in the formal mining sector. Many of these jobs are precarious and far from conforming to international and national labour standards. Accident rates in small-scale mines are routinely six or seven times higher than in larger operations, even in industrialised countries. A special problem is the employment of children (IGF, 2017). 
Once the activities end and the mine is abandoned, the release of pollutants may continue for several years (Demkova et al., 2017). Abandoned underground mines (for coal or stones); may lead to collapse, manifesting at surface from shallow depressions to sinkhole-like structures. This type of damage can lead to financial loss for anyone involved in the ownership or management of property in former mining areas, including householders, developers and local government (British Geological Survey, 2025).

## Metrics

Not available.

## Multi-Hazard Context

The figure below summarises common interactions between mining hazards and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify, or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.

## Risk Management

Risk generated by extreme events also needs to be incorporated in planning and management into pre-development, development and construction, mining and processing operations and post-mining phases. Whilst mining and mineral professionals have experience with risk management and managing workplace health and safety, changes to patterns of extreme weather events and future climate impacts are unpredictable. Responding to these challenges requires planning and preparation for events that many people have never experienced before. 
To prevent mining hazards from occurring, monitoring and site inspections are recommended prior to, during, immediately after and long after mineral production ceases and a mine is abandoned (Donelly, 2018). Governance needs to be improved and regulations enforced. The Global Environment Facility has developed the Global Opportunities for Long-term Development of ASGM Sector (GEF GOLD) which is an important funding body for projects on ASM and hazardous substances. In 2016, the Global Opportunities for Long-term Development (GEF GOLD) was launched to support the phasing out of mercury use in artisanal and small-scale gold mining and reduce environmental health and safety risks in the sector. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) is one of the main organisations in charge of implementing the project which is targeted at Burkina Faso, Colombia, Guyana, Indonesia, Kenya, Mongolia, Peru and the Philippines (GEF, 2017).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

The section and the table below offer an overview of monitoring mining hazards. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | 
- Environmental agencies, Hydrological agencies
- Geological survey institutions
- Mining Companies, health agencies for occupational hazards.
 | How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast? | 
- Remote sensing (Yu & Zahidi, 2023)
- Various sensors and monitoring technologies to identify, in real- time, hazards such as gas concentration, ground stability, and temperature
- Literature review and mapping (British Geological Survey, 2025)
- The Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) in the United States operates a Proximity Detection/Collision Warning System. This system, developed in collaboration with the mining industry, incorporates life-saving technology that can halt machine movement or send warning signals to operators when a person or object is detected in the machine’s path (MSHA, no date).
- Early warning method for gas explosion hazards by integrating an intelligent mining system with multivariate data analysis. This system utiliszes real-time data from mine safety monitoring, personnel tracking, and video surveillance. A model built using the Random Forest classification algorithm demonstrated 100% accuracy in predicting gas explosion risks (Li et al, 2023), a comprehensive early warning system for rock collapse hazards using monitoring technologies such as micro-seismic, acoustic emission, and electromagnetic radiation (Song et al, 2024)
