Rotavirus, a member of the reovirus family, causes watery diarrhoea, vomiting and severe dehydration in young children. Rotavirus is common, accounting for 35-60% of acute severe diarrhoea in children less than 5 years of age in countries without rotavirus vaccine, with the highest attributable percentage in infants. Rotavirus diarrhoea is ubiquitous, and children are infected at an early age. It often causes nosocomial outbreaks in paediatric wards where handwashing and other infection prevention and control measures are lax (WHO, no date a).
Rotavirus is the most common cause of severe diarrhoeal disease in infants and young children globally. It is transmitted through the oral-faecal route, directly from person to person, or indirectly through contaminated objects. People who are infected experience an abrupt onset of fever and vomiting followed by explosive, watery diarrhoea. Rotavirus diarrhoea is profuse, often leading to dehydration which can be severe, requiring hospitalization. The most severe threat posed by diarrhoea is dehydration (WHO no date a). The cornerstones of treatment of severe rotavirus diarrhoea are fluid replacement and zinc supplementation (WHO, no date a).
Vaccines against rotavirus are available, and vaccination is an important measure to reduce severe rotavirus-associated diarrhoea and mortality (WHO, no date a).
Rotavirus causes watery diarrhoea, vomiting and severe dehydration in young children. Rotavirus diarrhoea is ubiquitous and, unlike bacterial diarrhoea, is not more prevalent in settings with poor water, sanitation and hygiene. Rotavirus peaks in cool, dry seasons in temperate climates but exhibits less pronounced seasonality in tropical settings (WHO, no date a).
The clinical spectrum of rotavirus disease is wide, ranging from transient loose stools to severe diarrhoea and vomiting causing dehydration, electrolyte disturbances, shock, and death if rehydration is not provided. In typical cases, following an incubation period of 1-3 days, the onset of disease is abrupt, with fever and vomiting followed by watery diarrhoea. Gastrointestinal symptoms normally resolve within 3-7 days but may last for up to 2-3 weeks (WHO, no date a).
The World Health Organization (WHO) has published guidance on case classification and surveillance standards (WHO, 2018a).
