Unplanned and uncontrolled vegetation fires (wildfires) may be started by natural causes (lightning, occasionally by burning coal seams or volcanic activity), or-predominantly at the global level-by human activities, primarily through the burning of live or dead vegetation in natural or anthropogenically altered ecosystems (Robinne et al., 2018). These ecosystems include forests, grasslands, shrublands (bush, scrub), organic terrain (peatlands, wetlands), cultivated lands (agricultural and pasture lands, plantations, abandoned cultivated lands) and protected areas (wilderness, conservation sites).
Landscape fire attributes and descriptors include:
- Fuel type (e.g., grass, shrub, forest, peat)
- Fire type (e.g., ground, surface, crown)
- Fire behaviour and emissions (e.g., spread rate, intensity, severity, radiative power, smouldering vs. flaming combustion, gas and particle emissions)
- Temporal and spatial features (e.g., creeping fires, spotting, flashovers, short- to long-duration events; single vs. multiple fires) (GFMC, 2013).Wildfires may also affect residential and industrial areas, peri-urban fringes, critical infrastructure and remnants of human activities (e.g., waste deposits, mine sites, contaminated lands), potentially resulting in the co-burning of hazardous or toxic substances such as toxic gases (CH0300) and heavy metals (CH0100) (GFMC, no date).
In wildfire suppression, technology has clear limitations. Containment is often subject to weather and fuel conditions. A change in weather or fuel availability is frequently necessary to halt the spread of a wildfire. Understanding these limitations is essential to ensure safe and effective response while minimising risk to firefighters and the public (UNEP, 2022).
