The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) describes cyberbullying as bullying with the use of digital technologies. It is repeated behaviour, aimed at scaring, angering or shaming those who are targeted. Examples include: spreading lies about or posting embarrassing photos of someone on social media; sending hurtful messages or threats via messaging platforms; and impersonating someone and sending mean messages to others on their behalf (UNICEF, no date).
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and UNICEF define cyberbullying as wilful and repeated harm inflicted through the use of computers, cell phones, and other electronic devices (ITU & UNICEF, 2015). It may involve direct (such as chat or text messaging), semi-public (such as posting a harassing message on an e-mail list) or public communications (such as creating a website devoted to making fun of the victim).
Face-to-face bullying and cyberbullying can often happen alongside each other. But cyberbullying leaves a digital footprint - a record that can prove useful and provide evidence to help stop the abuse (UNICEF, no date). Online harassment is harassment taking place via the internet (on a social network, a forum, a multiplayer video game, or blogs).
Other cyberbullying activities include: the dissemination of photos or videos ridiculing the person; grooming; radicalisation; non-consensual diffusion of intimate photos or personal information; dissemination of false rumours; identity theft from social media accounts; impersonating another person online; sharing private messages; creating hate websites/social media pages; excluding people from online groups; flaming, or using purposeful extreme or offensive language in order to get into online arguments and fights; and cyber stalking (PHE, 2014; Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development, 2019; Family Lives, no date).
Socio-economic or educational disadvantage, disability, minority ethnic origin (some groups) and LGBT status are also indicators of a high risk for cyberbullying.
