The Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus is a tick-borne virus (Nairovirus) of the Bunyaviridae family. The virus is primarily transmitted to people from ticks and livestock animals. Human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. CCHF is endemic in Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East and Asia, in countries south of the 50th parallel north. (WHO, 2025)
The hosts of the CCHF virus include a wide range of wild and domestic animals such as cattle, sheep and goats. Many birds are resistant to infection, but ostriches are susceptible and may show a high prevalence of infection in endemic areas, where they have been at the origin of human cases. There is no apparent disease in these animals (WHO, 2025).
There is no vaccine available for either people or animals (WHO, 2025).
Human
The CCHF virus is transmitted to humans either by tick bites (principally ticks of the genus Hyalomma) or through contact with infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughter. Human-to-human transmission can occur from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. Hospital-acquired infections can also occur due to improper sterilisation of medical equipment and reuse of non-sterile needles (WHO, 2025).
The length of the incubation period depends on the mode of acquisition of the virus. Following infection by a tick bite, the incubation period is usually one to three days, with a maximum of nine days. The incubation period following contact with infected blood or tissues is usually five to six days, with a documented maximum of thirteen days (WHO, 2025).
The disease was first described in Crimea in 1944 and given the name Crimean haemorrhagic fever. In 1969 it was recognised that the pathogen causing Crimean haemorrhagic fever was the same as that responsible for an illness identified in 1956 in Congo. The linkage of the two place names resulted in the current name for the disease and the virus (WHO, 2024a).
Animal
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a zoonotic disease in many countries of Asia, Africa, the Middle East and southeastern Europe. The virus circulates in a tick-vertebrate-tick cycle but can also be transmitted horizontally and vertically within the tick population. Hyalomma ticks infest a wide spectrum of different wildlife species, e.g. deer and hares, and free-ranging livestock animals, e.g. goat, cattle, and sheep. These animals play a crucial role in the life cycle of ticks, and in the transmission and amplification of the virus. As animals do not develop clinical signs, CCHFV infections have no economic impact on livestock animal production (WOAH, 2024). Any CCHF-related specimens from suspected or confirmed human or animal cases must be transported as UN2814 using P620 packaging on any mode of transport (United Nations, 2023).

## Drivers

The CCHF virus is transmitted to people either by tick bites or through contact with infected animal blood or tissues during and immediately after slaughter. The majority of cases have occurred in people involved in the livestock industry, such as agricultural workers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians (Ergönül, 2006).
Human-to-human transmission can occur resulting from close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected persons. Hospital-acquired infections can also occur due to improper sterilization of medical equipment, reuse of needles and contamination of medical supplies. In the absence of a vaccine, the only way to reduce Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures for reducing exposure (WHO, 2025).

## Impacts

Onset of symptoms is sudden and can include fever, muscle ache, dizziness, neck pain, backache, headache, sore eyes and photophobia (sensitivity to light). There may be nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and sore throat early on, followed by sharp mood swings and confusion. After 2–4 days the agitation may be replaced by sleepiness, depression and lassitude, and the abdominal pain may localize to the upper right quadrant, with detectable hepatomegaly (liver enlargement) (WHO, 2024a). 
Other clinical signs include tachycardia (fast heart rate), lymphadenopathy (enlarged lymph nodes), and a petechial rash (a rash caused by bleeding into the skin) on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth and throat, and on the skin. The petechiae may give way to larger rashes called ecchymoses, and other haemorrhagic phenomena. There is usually evidence of hepatitis, and severely ill patients may experience rapid kidney deterioration, sudden liver failure or pulmonary failure after the fifth day of illness (WHO, 2024a).

## Metrics

The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has published case definitions on Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever prevention and control (ECDC, 2008). WHO also provides documentation to help disease investigation and control and has created an aide–memoire on standard precautions in health care, which is intended to reduce the risk of transmission of bloodborne and other pathogens (WHO, 2024b).

## Multi-Hazard Context

CCHF has been observed where conflicts are on-going and in areas where humans are in close contact with wild animals carrying the virus (Ergönül, 2006). Changes in climatic conditions have been suggested to be one of the factors that has facilitated reproduction of the tick population, and consequently the increased incidence of tick-borne infectious diseases (Ergönül, 2006).

## Risk Management

It is difficult to prevent or control CCHF infection in animals and ticks as the tick-animal-tick cycle usually goes unnoticed and the infection in domestic animals is usually not apparent. Furthermore, the tick vectors are numerous and widespread, so tick control with acaricides (chemicals intended to kill ticks) is only a realistic option for well-managed livestock production facilities. There are no vaccines available for use in animals (WHO, 2024a). 
Although an inactivated, mouse brain-derived vaccine against CCHF has been developed and used on a small scale in eastern Europe, there is currently no safe and effective vaccine widely available for human use. 
In the absence of a vaccine, the only way to reduce infection in people is by raising awareness of the risk factors and educating people about the measures they can take to reduce exposure to the virus (WHO, 2025). Public health advice should focus on several aspects such as reducing the risk of tick-to-human transmission: wearing protective clothing (long sleeves, long trousers); wearing light coloured clothing to allow easy detection of ticks on the clothes; using approved acaricides (chemicals intended to kill ticks) on clothing; using approved repellent on the skin and clothing; regularly examining clothing and skin for ticks; if found, remove them safely; seeking to eliminate or control tick infestations on animals or in stables and barns; and avoiding areas where ticks are abundant and seasons when they are most active (WHO, 2025). 
Health-care workers caring for patients with suspected or confirmed CCHF, or handling specimens from them, should implement standard infection control precautions. These include basic hand hygiene, use of personal protective equipment, safe injection practices and safe burial practices (WHO, 2025). 
WHO is working with partners to support CCHF surveillance, diagnostic capacity and outbreak response activities in Europe, the Middle East, Asia and Africa (WHO, 2023).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

WHO supports countries to conduct all-hazards strategic risk assessment in the contexts of health emergencies and disasters, which results in the development of a country risk profile. Empowered with the country risk profile, inclusive of a seasonal risk calendar, countries can anticipate potential emergencies before they occur to trigger early alerts and inform early actions (WHO, 2021).
WHO's Early Warning, Alert and Response System (EWARS) has been designed to improve disease outbreak detection in emergency settings, such as in countries in conflict or following a disaster from natural hazards. It is a simple and cost-effective way to rapidly set up a disease surveillance system. EWARS is deployed during an emergency as an adjunct to the national disease surveillance system. WHO works with Ministries of Health and health sector partners to train local health workers to use the system. After the emergency, EWARS should re-integrate back into the national system (WHO, 2023).
The section and the table below offer an overview of monitoring for Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | WHO
 | How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast? | FAO empres-i+ https://empres-i.apps.fao.org/diseases   
WOAH WAHIS https://wahis.woah.org/#/event-management
