The scientific meaning of radioactive is exhibiting radioactivity, emitting or relating to the emission of ionizing radiation or particles (IAEA, 2022). Depending on the magnitude of exposure, the radioactive substance may become a hazard to human health; as such it is subject to regulatory control by national laws and national regulatory authorities. Radioactive material may also be a hazard to animal health, other forms of life and the environment (IAEA, 2018).
Radioactive materials (natural and human-made) are widely used in industry, medicine and research but can also be used maliciously.
- Alpha-radiation: consists of heavy, positively charged particles emitted by atoms of elements such as uranium and radium. Alpha radiation cannot penetrate skin and can be stopped by a thin paper sheet. However, alpha-emitting radioactive material entering the body by breathing, eating, or drinking, can affect organs and tissues and cause biological damage (IAEA, no date a).
- Beta-radiation: consists of electrons, is more penetrating than alpha-radiation and can pass through the skin surface. In general, a sheet of aluminium a few millimetres thick will stop beta-radiation (IAEA, no date a).
- X-rays or Gamma-rays: electromagnetic radiation similar to light, and radio waves. Depending on their energy, x- or gamma-rays can pass right through the human body, but not through a concrete wall or lead (IAEA, no date a).
- Neutrons: uncharged particles that do not produce ionisation directly but give rise to radiation due to their interaction with the material they traverse. Neutrons are highly penetrating and can only be stopped by thick masses of materials such as concrete, water or paraffin.

## Drivers

There are a number of types of incidents which may involve radiation agents or materials, i.e. an ionising radiation hazard, in addition to another hazard. For example, natural hazards and disasters, such as earthquakes, floods or wildfires may seriously challenge nuclear installation safety, and some nuclear installations make use of chemicals that would be very damaging to human health and the environment if released in an uncontrolled manner. Tools such as the IAEA External Events Notification System (EENS, see below), help national and international responders to manage such large-scale events. The Fukushima nuclear accident serves as a representative example of the impact these events can have on nuclear facilities (NCBI, 2014).
Radiological hazards can occur through accidental spills of radioactive chemicals in laboratories, reprocessing plants or hospitals (such as a spill of uranyl nitrate) or accidents during radiation therapy. Accidents in nuclear power plants can lead to contamination of territories over thousands of square kilometres over tens to hundreds of years by alpha-, beta- and gamma radiation, requiring zoning and evacuation measures (IAEA, no date).
Exposure to radiation may be external, internal, or combined, and can occur through various exposure pathways (Nuclear emergencies: information for the public - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)). Exposure to radiation can be classified into three exposure situations: planned exposures (occupational and medical exposures); existing exposures (natural sources such as radon gas or residual radiation from past accidents or industrial activities); and emergency exposures (radiological and nuclear emergencies, accidents in transport, medicine, research, or even malicious acts involving radioactive material) (IAEA, 2021).
External exposure may occur near an unshielded radioactive source or when airborne radioactive material (such as dust, liquid, or aerosols) is deposited on skin or clothes. This type of radioactive material can often be removed from the body by simply washing (IAEA, 2021). Internal exposure to ionising radiation occurs when a radionuclide is inhaled, ingested or otherwise enters into the bloodstream (e.g., by injection or through wounds). Internal contamination with most radionuclides needs medical intervention to remove radionuclides from the body (IAEA, 2021).

## Impacts

Studies following survivors of atomic bomb events and radiation industry workers have confirmed that the radiation exposure increases the risk of cancer, and the risk increases as the dose increases (UNSCEAR 2021). 
Types of emergencies involving radioactive material range from a small-scale radiological incident involving a lost or stolen industrial radioactive source, over-exposure of a person in an occupational or medical setting, or as a result of a transportation incident; to a large-scale nuclear emergency at a nuclear installation such as a nuclear power plant or a research reactor, or a detonation of a military or improvised nuclear device (IAEA, 2021). Examples of nuclear emergencies are nuclear bomb detonations in Japan at the end of the Second World War; the Three Mile Island and Chernobyl nuclear power plant accidents; and the Great Eastern Japan Earthquake which generated a tsunami and resulted in the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident.

## Metrics

The magnitude of a source of alpha- or beta-radiation is given by its activity, measured in Becquerel (Bq). 1 Bq corresponds to 1 radioactive decay/second. Sometimes the Curie (Ci), an older, non-SI unit based on the activity of a gram of radium-226, is still used. 1 Ci is equivalent to 37 GBq. The absorbed dose of any type of radiation is measured in Gray (Gy), and 1 Gy is equivalent to 1 joule of energy absorbed in 1 kg of matter. The impact of radiation on health is measured by the unit 'Sievert' symbolised as Sv.
Dose limits in most countries are set according to the Iinternational System of Radiological Protection (ICRP 103; 118), which is based on the principles of justification, optimisation, and dose limitation. Recommendations based on the literature, produced by the International Commission for Radiological Protection, are translated into safety standards by the International Atomic Energy Agency. These are then adopted, or amended and adopted, as legislation at the national or regional levels.
The severity of a radiation emergency is identified by the International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale (INES) as demonstrated in the graphic below (IAEA, no date). INES is a standard tool for communicating the magnitude of nuclear and radiological events in a consistent manner (IAEA, no date).

## Multi-Hazard Context

The figure below summarises common interactions between radioactive agents and material and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify, or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.

## Risk Management

Protective actions to prevent or reduce radiation exposure in the case of a radiation emergency situation depend on the type of emergency and may include: taking shelter; evacuation or even permanent relocation from an affected area; restriction of the consumption of contaminated food or water; administration of iodine thyroid blocking (in the case of radioactive iodine release, see the HIP on Iodine/Iodide excess/inadequate intake CH0105); monitoring and measuring radiation in affected people and the environment; securing radioactive sources and cleaning up affected areas; as well as providing information, risk communication, psychological support, medical care and long-term follow-up to those in need (IAEA, 2021). 
Other risk management measures include (IAEA, 2021): 
- Safe siting, design and construction of nuclear power plants as well as controls and back up measures for their safe operation and radioactive waste management and isolation from the geo-environment.
- Controls, equipment and training to protect personnel working with radioactive sources.
- Security measures to control access to supply and use of radiation sources.
- Facility, local and national multisectoral radiation emergency response plans for a range of scenarios from low-level exposure to a significant release of radioactivity.
- Effective risk communication is essential to the public and emergency responders (WHO, 2022).
- Consideration of the psychosocial impact of radiation incidents, including on mental health. The Code of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources (the Code) was established to achieve and maintain a high level of safety and security of radioactive sources across the globe. Following the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 in the USA, the provisions in the text addressing the security of radioactive sources were enhanced. In September 2003, the Code was approved, and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) General Conference invited States to make a political commitment to work towards the principles therein and currently 119 States have done so (IAEA, no date b). 
The IAEA Preventive Measures for Nuclear and Other Radioactive Material out of Regulatory Control elaborates upon the recommendations given in IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 15, Nuclear Security Recommendations on Nuclear and Other Radioactive Material out of Regulatory Control, in relation to preventative measures (IAEA, 2019). It serves as a guidance document for Member States interested in strengthening their nuclear security regime as it relates to nuclear and other radioactive material out of regulatory control and in improving their capabilities. 
There are also a number of different monitoring and early warning systems for hazards that can result in the release of radioactive agents or materials at local, national and international levels. Early Warnings for All was launched in 2022 by the UN, with the aim to protect everyone on Earth from hazardous weather, water, or climate events through life-saving early warning systems by the end of 2027. (Early Warnings for All, 2022)

## Monitoring and Early Warning

The section and the table below offer an overview of monitoring radioactive agents & material. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | IAEA
 | How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast? | The IAEA International Radiation Monitoring Information System is a web-based tool for sharing, aggregating and visualizing large quantities of radiation monitoring data during a nuclear or radiological incident or emergency, to aid in decision- making. IRMIS has been developed to support the implementation of the Early Notification Convention, facilitating the reporting and visualization of large quantities of radiation monitoring data during nuclear or radiological incidents or emergencies. In addition, IRMIS supports and enhances some of the features of the Unified System for Information Exchange in Incidents and Emergencies (USIE) (IAEA, 2020).
In addition, the IAEA External Events Notification System (EENS) is a web- based tool which provides real time information on external events and hazards, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, volcano eruptions, river and coastal flooding, rotational winds and wildfires, that have occurred or are expected to occur, including on their severity and location, as well as estimations of their potential effects on nuclear installations and major population centres. The system collects relevant data and sends it directly to the IAEA’s Incident and Emergency Centre (IEC) and External Event Safety Section (EESS) for assessment.
