A dam failure is a catastrophic incident characterized by:
- an uncontrolled release of impounded water;
- and/or by a total loss of integrity of the dam structure, its foundation, or abutments.The term "dam" refers to any man-made barrier capable of impounding water, wastewater, or liquid-borne materials for storage or water control. A dam is considered to be 25 feet (7.62m) or more in height from either the natural stream bed or, if not across a stream channel, from the lowest elevation of the outer limit of the barrier to the maximum water storage elevation or has a storage capacity of 50 acre-feet (61,625m3) or more. A large dam is a dam with a height of 15 metres or greater from lowest foundation to crest or a dam between 5 metres and 15 metres impounding more than 3 million cubic metres (ICOLD, 2019). This definition is commonly adopted worldwide.
Dams are commonly categorised by a wide range of factors such as composition, height, and reservoir volume. Dams are typically constructed of earth, rock, concrete or tailings (chaff) from mining operations. As a function of upstream topography, even a small dam can impound or detain many millions of litres of water (acre-feet of millions of gallons (FEMA, 2017). The collapse or movement leading to a break in the dam could produce life-threatening flood situations due to the high velocities and large volumes of water involved. In the event of a dam failure, the potential energy of water stored behind the dam can cause significant damage to property and livelihoods, as well as injuries and loss of life for people downstream of the dam (FEMA, 2017).
The hazard potential classification system categorizes dam failure risks into three levels: LOW, SIGNIFICANT, and HIGH, with increasing adverse consequences (FEMA, 2004). Each level encompasses the consequences of the lower levels. The frameworks underscore that any dam failure, regardless of size, could endanger downstream life and property. They emphasize the unpredictability of such events and the potential for unexpected hazards, necessitating proactive risk management measures to mitigate risks effectively. (FEMA, 2017; ICOLD, 2023):
- The consequences of a low hazard potential dam failure should result in no probable loss of human life and low economic and/or environment losses.
- The consequences of a significant hazard potential dam failure should result in no probable loss of human life but can cause economic loss, environmental damage, disruption of lifeline facilities, or can impact other concerns.
- The consequences of a high hazard potential dam failure will probably cause loss of human life.Three summary examples of dam failures follow:
- Brumadinho dam disaster Brazil 2019. On 25 January 2019, Córrego do Feijão's tailing dam at Brumadinho city breached, leading to at least 12 million cubic metres of tailing spread into Paraopeba River and the surrounding area, leaving more than 270 people dead and many missing, with major environmental impacts on the downstream catchment (Cambridge and Shaw, 2019; Thompson et al., 2020). This was the fifth tailings dam disaster to have occurred in the same region in an 18-year period and is considered the worst documented tailings dam failure to have occurred in the past 30 to 40 years. The failure at Brumadinho showed geotechnical similarities to that at Fundao in 2015, with the characteristic of all foundation zones predisposing the facility to an increased risk of basal liquefaction under increasing stress. Upstream construction, as well as management commitment to quality control and inspection and monitoring during operation, in addition to liquefaction and poor governance are potentially considered for the failure of the Brumadinho dam (Thompson et al., 2020).
- Ajka Red Sludge Reservoir. On 4 October 2010. The retaining wall of a caustic waste reservoir at the Ajka alumina plant near Kolontar, Hungary, collapsed releasing more than one million cubic metres of highly alkaline sludge containing toxic metals. The waste material flooded several nearby villages, resulting in 10 fatalities, 123 injured people, damage to buildings, and significant ecological and environmental impacts. Reports concluded that a check on the reservoirs stability and statics had not been performed by the relevant authorities (Ujaczki et al., 2015).
- Malpasset Dam, Fréjus, France. On December 2, 1959, the Malpasset arch dam in southeast France suddenly failed, flooding the valley down to the sea, causing huge destruction and more than 400 casualties. Built from 1952 to 1954 for water supply and irrigation, filling of the reservoir was delayed five years and the failure occurred following a flash flood of the river the dam was closing. Post failure studies and expertise during a trial revealed poor field investigations on a micaschist rock foundation crisscrossed by faults, and poor management of construction of the structure. The failure was ascribed to uplift, moving a rock dihedron defined by a conspicuous fault and a tear along foliation (Duffaut & Larouzée, 2019).A review of failure mode analysis and implications for current and future resilience of flood protection infrastructure in the United States has been undertaken (Primary and Secondary Causes of Dam Failure in the US, no date). Dam failures are classified by date, location, dam type, primary and secondary root causes, cost in year of incident, damage type, and fatalities. The International Commission on Large Dams (ICOLD) is an international non-governmental organisation dedicated to sharing professional information and knowledge of the design, construction, maintenance, and impact of large dams. ICOLD has 100 member national committees and over 10,000 individual members, (ICOLD, no date). ICOLD has created a World Register of Dams. This is a global database on dams, established based on the national inventories sent by member countries of ICOLD. The register is continuously updated and includes information on more than 55,000 dams. In addition to the dam register, ICOLD has developed a technical dictionary. Between 2000 and 2009, more than 200 notable dam failures happened worldwide (Jonkman & Vrijling, 2008).

## Drivers

Dam failure is likely to occur due to seepage and internal erosion, poor foundation conditions, overtopping, static and seismic instability and for other reasons such as subsidence, structural issues, external erosion and slope instability (Lyu et al., 2019). Dam failure may result from flash flood or river flood that can overwhelm the dam structure. Earthquakes may cause structural damage or failure. Prolonged droughts can reduce water levels, affecting the dam's functionality and stability. Landslides into reservoirs can create waves that overtop dams. Extreme weather events such as hurricanes, cyclones, and other severe weather can impact dam integrity. 
Contaminants from industrial activities can weaken dam materials and structures while accidental releases of hazardous chemicals can cause structural damage or compromise the dam's integrity. Incidents involving nuclear or radiological materials can have catastrophic impacts on dam safety. Accidents on or near dams can pose significant hazards, especially if they involve vehicles transporting hazardous materials. Design flaws and poor maintenance (inadequate inspections and repairs) can lead to undetected structural weaknesses while mistakes in managing water levels, especially during extreme weather events, can lead to overtopping or structural stress. Accidental damages caused by construction activities near dams or deliberate damage to the dam's structure or operational systems can cause failure.

## Impacts

Dam failure can lead to rapid draining of the reservoir, causing erosion and habitat destruction upstream. Downstream, the sudden release of water can result in catastrophic flooding, endangering lives and property 
Dam safety agencies have generally adopted a common tiered hazard classification structure including Low, Significant, and High hazard potential classifications. Dam safety engineers commonly use the hazard potential classification system as a prioritisation tool to focus attention on those dams with the greatest potential consequences of failure. 
Dam failures can damage various infrastructures such as transportation, electricity, communication, and water systems, and can cause surface and groundwater contamination as well as air pollution. Additionally, floods resulting from dam failures can trigger secondary disasters, including landslides, soil erosion, and ground subsidence (FEMA, 2012). 
Risk creep also known as hazard creep is a term used to describe the gradual increase in anticipated consequences of a dam failure due to infrastructure development either along the drainage below a dam or within the reservoir area upstream. Although the physical condition of the dam may not change, hazard creep can result in an immediate adverse impact on the overall risk profile of a dam because the consequence component has increased. For example, new residential development within the dam breach floodplain could raise the status of a dam from one with a low hazard potential to one with significant or high hazard potential. Hazard creep can require costly dam safety modifications to address design deficiencies, such as to increase spill way capacity to safely route the probable maximum flood (for high hazard potential dams) (FEMA, 2017).

## Metrics

Many more works have supplemented the inventory since that time, including ICOLD Bulletin No. 194 "Tailings Dam Safety" (ICOLD 2023).
It identifies accidents and events by dam type and age and by cause of accident. It increases the designer's awareness of the range of unforeseen factors with, to some extent, their likelihood, and the sequences of events that can lead to disaster.

## Multi-Hazard Context

The figure below summarises common interactions between dam failure and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.

## Risk Management

Following recent dam failure disasters, many countries put safety first and invest in prevention largely using Dam Safety Laws. This includes applying the UNECE’s safety standards ‘Safety Guidelines and Good Practices for Tailings Management facilities’ (UNECE, 2016). Such guidelines, developed by the Joint Expert Group on Water and Industrial Accidents under UNECE’s Industrial Accidents Convention and Water Convention, provide authorities with recommendations for practical applications to limit accidents and the severity of their consequences (UNECE, 2016). 
The Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Industrial Accidents Convention sets the future direction for technological disaster risk reduction towards 2030 (UNECE, 2018). 
For what concerns the relation between Flood risk and Dam Failure, the FEMA P-1085 (2023) is the main resource for risk modelling and flood mapping related to dams. It provides guidelines for creating maps to visualize flood risks from dam incidents or failures. These maps help assess hazards, support emergency action planning, and guide resource allocation to protect lives and property. It incorporates advanced modelling, GIS tools, and collaborative input from stakeholders, integrating these maps into emergency plans to enhance community preparedness. 
An early warning system (EWS) is a critical tool for preventing or mitigating potential disasters caused by dam failures. Pre-event planning focuses on assessing risks, developing appropriate plans, and implementing mitigation measures and preparedness activities to reduce risks effectively. Risk assessment involves analysing threats and vulnerabilities to exposed people and assets to estimate potential losses. Planning actions include efforts by federal, state, local, and tribal entities to support long-term risk reduction, emergency response, and post-event recovery. These activities strengthen community resilience and response capacity, minimizing the impact of dam failures (FEMA, 2017).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

Compressive and regular deformation of a dam can be monitored using satellite Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) (Wang et al., 2023).
