Point source air pollution focuses on acute and chronic sources of such pollution. It can be natural or human-made. A human-generated point source of air pollution emits a significant amount of air pollutants from a fixed location such as an explosion, pollutants from a chimney stack or a tyre fire, power stations, steel works, foundries, incinerators, wood and pulp processors, paper mills, refineries and chemical production (Kibble and Harrison, 2005; Dunne et al., 2014). Point sources of air pollution from naturally occurring sources include smoke from wildfires, ash from volcanic eruptions and sand particles from deserts lifted and transported in the wind across cities and continents in the form of sandstorms (Aghababaeian, 2021; Stewart, 2022; Paul et al., 2023).
Air pollutants can be emitted directly from a source (i.e. primary pollutants) or can form from chemical reactions in the atmosphere (i.e. secondary pollutants). When concentrations of these substances reach critical levels in the air, they harm humans, animals, plants and ecosystems, reduce visibility and corrode materials, buildings and cultural heritage sites (UNEP, no date).
In many cases, the key question is whether releases from a point source result in a significant increase in exposure or whether other sources (background exposure) give rise to the dominant exposure (Kibble and Harrison, 2005). Detailed investigation of these differences requires high spatiotemporal resolution air quality data alongside incidence data obtained from accurate health information systems, such as disease registers or via case-control studies.
