For liquefaction to occur, the shear strength of the soil volume (e.g., the strength due to contact between individual soil grains) must be reduced to near-zero. Soil compression increases the pore-water pressure, causing the water to move toward the Earth's surface where pressure is lower. Under typical loading (e.g., from temperature changes, increased groundwater), the water then drains and contact between grains retains their strength. However, when loading cycles occur rapidly, such as during ground shaking, intermittent drainage is prohibited, and liquefaction may initiate (Kramer, 1996). During heavy precipitation, rapid snowmelt, and earthquakes, sensitive glaciomarine clays can lose strength and liquefy. The salts holding the clay-sized particles are leached triggering liquefaction (e.g. Crawford, 1968).
The following characteristics are common to deposits most susceptible to liquefaction (Kramer, 1996):
- Loose, sandy soils; however, liquefaction has been observed in gravels and coarse silts (Seed et al., 2003)
- Rounded, well-sorted grains (e.g., uniform grain size); these compact most easily
- Recently deposited, especially of Holocene age (

## Drivers

Drivers of liquefaction are related to soil properties such as particle shape, grading, uniformity of grain size and relative density or voids ratio. Soil saturation can also influence liquefaction. Liquefaction can be triggered by rapid drawdown from erosion at the base of a slope. Liquefaction can also be triggered by intense rainfall (Najar et al., 2023) and earthquakes. Loading can also trigger liquefaction.

## Impacts

The consequences to structures and infrastructure of liquefaction include: differential settlement of structures often resulting in cracking; loss of bearing support; flotation of buried structures such as sewer lines, tanks, and pipes; strong lateral forces against retaining structures such as seawalls; lateral spreading (limited lateral movement); and lateral flows (extensive lateral movement), particularly impacting on slopes or valley sides (e.g., Cubrinovski, 2013). 
 Earthquake-induced liquefaction can have varied effects on the surrounding built environment. Buildings, infrastructure, and utilities normally supported by the soil may sink, or undergo cracking or other structural damage; pile foundations may buckle or tilt; and lightweight, buried masses such as pipelines may become buoyant and float to the surface. Liquefaction can also cause rapid settling of sediments, flooding (including breaches of earthen embankments or other retaining structures), and lateral spreading of soils (Kramer, 1996). 
Liquefaction associated with the Christchurch earthquakes caused significant disruption to transport infrastructure, and to storm- and wastewater networks, and posed physical and mental health hazards for the exposed community and clean-up (Villemure et al., 2012; Cubrinovski, M., 2013.). From a human health perspective, the liquefaction material posed several hazards. Due to the extensive damage to the sewage disposal networks from lateral spreading and differential settlement, there was a risk that much of the liquefaction ejecta had been contaminated with raw sewage creating a long-term health risk to the population. During hot and windy conditions, the dry finer portions of silt were mobilised by the wind creating a possible respiratory health hazard. Many volunteers were involved in the clean-up operations. Indeed, the much-celebrated Student-Army was successfully used to coordinate the work around the city (Villemure et al., 2012).

## Metrics

Liquefaction susceptibility can be assessed in advance of earthquakes (e.g., Lirer at al., 2019). Often, this is based on a simplified indication of a site's likelihood to liquefy. A common approach is the liquefaction potential index (LPI), which considers a factor of safety against liquefaction, the layers of earth that might liquefy, and the proximity of these layers to the ground surface (Iwasaki et al., 1984). While several methods are available for determining the factor of safety, they generally reflect the ability of the soil to resist the power of an earthquake. Soil resistance is either measured in situ or estimated based on the surficial deposits and hydrological conditions (Kramer, 1996; Witter et al., 2006). The comparison to earthquake power can be deterministic for the worst-case scenario earthquake (Orhan et al., 2013), or probabilistic for the range of possible earthquakes that could occur (Witter et al., 2006).
Liquefaction susceptibility maps (also called liquefaction hazard maps) are currently not available on a global scale but are often provided by the geological agencies in a region. See USGS (no date) for an example of a liquefaction map for the San Francisco Bay Area.
The smallest earthquake for which liquefaction records exist was MW ~ 5, with the most distant observed liquefaction reaching only ~2 km; by contrast, the most distant liquefaction for an earthquake of MW >7, may exceed 100 km (Ambraseys, 1988). During the 2011 MW 9.0 Tohoku earthquake, damage due to liquefaction occurred at least 250 km from the epicentre (Yamaguchi et al., 2012).

## Multi-Hazard Context

The figure below summarises common interactions between liquefaction and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.

## Risk Management

The primary mitigation measure is to use planning to avoid development over liquefiable soils. These include in-situ testing of liquefaction resistance using standard penetration tests, cone penetration tests, shear wave velocity recordings, and dilatometer tests (Kramer, 1996); land microzonation via LPI or another assessment parameter that prohibits building on susceptible deposits (Lirer et al., 2019). Soil stabilization can be carried out via compaction methods or injection of grout, such as vibrostone columns and dynamic compaction (Shenthan et al., 2004). Other types of mitigation are incorporated in building design (NZGS and MB IE, 2017). During construction, controlling both the rate of excavation and the head, or increasing seepage flow paths to reduce seepage forces are the key methods used to minimise liquefaction (Pane et al., 2015). Nature-Based Solutions can be used to stabilise soil, such as vegetation for stabilising soils in coastal areas (e.g., Kumar et al., 2021).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

The section and the table below offer an overview of monitoring liquefaction. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management. 
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | Earthquake early warning (EEW) systems can indirectly inform about liquefaction hazard. EEW systems trigger warnings of an earthquake in regions remote to the source, and are maintained by the national organizations with the remit to monitor seismic activity (e.g., USGS for the United States). For some countries, some local/urban systems also exist that are maintained by the local government.
 | How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast? | Not Applicable
