he New World screwworm, Cochliomyia hominivorax Cocquerel, is a blowfly that is an obligate parasite of warm-blooded animals in tropical and subtropical regions of South America and the Caribbean. Females seek animals or humans and lay their eggs on the skin, often near open wounds (PAHO, no date: WOAH, no date). Larvae feed on the animal's living tissues, enlarging the wound, which can cause death if not treated. The period between oviposition at a wound site and the expression of disease due to burrowing larvae can be as short as one to two days. After cessation of feeding, larvae leave the animal and pupate in the soil. The life cycle takes approximately three weeks. Infestation of tissue by fly larvae is known as 'myiasis'.
Human
NWS infestations in humans are rare but very painful. If you have an NWS infestation, you may see maggots (larvae) around or in an open wound. They could also be in your nose, eyes, or mouth. Tell your healthcare provider of any recent travel to Central or South America, or the Caribbean.
Symptoms can also include
- Unexplained skin lesions (wounds or sores) that do not heal.
- Skin wounds or sores that worsen over time.
- Painful skin wounds or sores.
- Bleeding from open sores.
- Feeling larvae movement within a skin wound or sore, nose, mouth, or eyes.
- Seeing maggots around or in open sores.
- A foul-smelling odour from the site of the infestation.Secondary bacterial infections sometimes occur and may cause fever or chills (CDC, 2024).
Animal
In 1988, the parasite spread from the Americas to Libya; it was identified by Libyan veterinarians in the northwest part of the country. The mode of introduction and the country from which the pest came remain unknown. Positive taxonomic identification of the pest was made by British scientists, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) confirmed the presence of the new world screwworm myiasis disease in Libya in March 1989 (Lindquist & Abusowa, 1991). Many cases of screwworm myiasis have been documented in humans.
Economic losses due to screwworm infestation of livestock are significant. In 2005, it was estimated that in South America alone annual losses were approximately USD 3.6 billion (Scott et al., 2020). New World screwworm eradication programmes have eliminated this myiasis from Curacao, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the USA, Mexico and in Central America (Guatemala, Belize, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica), down to Panama on the southern part of the country where a buffer zone was established.
Since 2021, the New World screwworm fly has been making a dramatic comeback (reinfestation) in regions where it had been eradicated for over 30 years. All Central American countries and, more recently, Mexico have reported its reappearance. This resurgence poses a significant threat to livestock, wildlife, and public health. As of 2024, New World screwworm is found in all countries in Central America (Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, México, Nicaragua, Panamá), three in Caribbean (Cuba, Dominican Republic, Jamaica) out of its 13 sovereign states, and 10 out of 12 countries from South Americas (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela; and suspected in Guyana).
The disease can quickly become debilitating or fatal if it affects the eyes, mouth, nasal or frontal sinuses, or ears (CFSPH, 2016). Clinical presentation of screwworms is always associated with a variety of pre-established wounds and should be considered in the event of any myiasis. Wounds may manifest draining or enlargement; signs of infestation with serosanguineous discharge are often accompanied by a distinctive odour. Animals with screwworm myiasis often display discomfort and appear unthrifty and depressed; separate from the group and may also manifest anorexia and reduced milk production. Morbidity, although variable in areas with high screwworm populations, may reach up to 100% in naval wounds of newborns. If untreated, animals may die within one to two weeks due to over-infestation, toxic shock and/or secondary bacterial infection.
Laboratory diagnosis is by identification of the parasites under the microscope. Field diagnosis of screwworm larvae, even with a microscope or magnifying glass, is difficult. Adult screwworms are rarely seen. They are also difficult to distinguish from other flies. Other techniques used mainly in research laboratories include cuticular hydrocarbon analysis, analysis of mitochondrial DNA, and random amplified polymorphic DNA polymerase chain reaction (RAPD-PCR) assays. Serology is not used (CFSPH, 2016).
Screwworm infestations can be treated in both endemic and non-endemic regions; euthanasia of the animal is not usually required. Although some wounds may be surgically excised, most are treated with a suitable larvicide and allowed to heal without closure. Treatment is usually repeated at intervals until the wound has healed. Removal of necrotic tissue may be necessary, and antibiotics may be given when secondary bacterial contamination is present. In non-endemic regions, the animal is quarantined until treatment is complete and the wound has healed. Treatment of the environment may also be necessary. Larvae that are removed from the wound must be placed in alcohol preservative or destroyed. If any larvae leave an infested wound and mature into adults, screwworms can become established in an area (CFSPH, 2016).
