PFAS are a large family of chemicals with a common feature: they contain carbon-fluorine bonds that make them highly stable, persistent, and resistant to degradation. They are widely used in various consumer products and industrial applications, but they also raise significant environmental and health concerns due to their persistence in the environment and their potential to accumulate in the human body. The European Union, The EU Commission, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and other health agencies have ongoing research and guidelines regarding the regulation, monitoring, and health risks associated with PFAS exposure. Because of their chemical structure, PFAS are also referred to as "forever chemicals" because they do not break down easily over time.
The most widely studied of these PFAS are perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA). Although the stability of PFOS and PFOA as well as their surfactant properties make them useful in consumer and industrial applications, there are concerns with their persistence and impacts on the environment and human health, as a result of exposure through the widespread uses of these chemicals. Drinking-water is one of several environmental sources of human exposure to PFAS, along with exposure via food, use in consumer products and occupational exposures (WHO, 2023)
Key Characteristics:
- Persistence: PFAS are extremely persistent in the environment and in human bodies due to the strong carbon-fluorine bond.
- Wide Application: PFAS are used in products such as stain-resistant fabrics, waterproofing agents, firefighting foams, and non-stick cookware.
- Health Concerns: Many PFAS chemicals have been linked to adverse health effects, including developmental effects, immune system disruption, liver toxicity, and cancer.
