African Swine Fever (ASF) is a highly contagious, generalized disease of pigs caused by an Iridovirus of the family Asfarviridae that exhibits varying virulence between strains and is very hardy to physical and chemical inactivation. The agent can remain viable for long periods in blood, faeces and tissues. It can also multiply in its vectors. In view of this, control of ASF is dependent on stamping-out policy and strict quarantine enforcement (FAO, 2019).
In the natural sylvatic cycle, the soft-bodied, eyeless Ornithodoros ticks (also known as tampans) are, together with African wild suids, the natural reservoir hosts of ASFV. They can transmit the virus through their bites. All members of the pig family (Suidae) are susceptible to infection, but clinical disease is only seen in domestic and feral pigs, as well as in the closely related European wild boar. Wild African suids are asymptomatic carriers of ASF and act as the reservoir of the virus in parts of Africa. These include warthogs (Phacochoerus africanus and P. aethiopicus), bushpigs (Potamochoerus porcus and P. larvatus) and giant forest hogs (Hylochoerus meinertzhageni) (FAO, 2019).
In domestic pigs, ASF is transmitted mainly through direct contact, via the oronasal route, through excretions from infected pigs, or from ingestion of pork or other contaminated products containing the virus (e.g. swill, waste, carcasses, etc.). Further transmission pathways are indirect contact through fomites or vector-borne transmission through bites from infected Ornithodoros soft ticks, where present.
It most commonly appears in the acute form of a haemorrhagic fever. Subacute and chronic forms of the disease also exist. Mortality is usually close to 100% and pigs of all ages are affected (FAO, 2019).
In subacute and chronic cases, pigs may show milder clinical signs, such as loss of appetite, weight loss, and fever (Sánchez-Vizcaíno et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2021).
ASF is present in wild and/or domestic pigs in regions of Asia, Europe and Africa (OIE, 2018). People can transport the virus over large distances through contaminated meat and other sub-products such as skins, skulls, tusks or other hunting trophies (OIE, 2018; FAO, OIE & EC, 2019).
There are no commercial vaccines available for ASF. Some vaccine trials have been implemented in the Philippines and Vietnam. Most countries maintain a list of approved veterinary vaccines for use. For specific regulations, consult the country's veterinary authorities.
ASF is one of the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) listed diseases (WOAH, 2024b).
The disease is not a zoonosis, i.e. it does not infect humans.
