Acute hepatopancreatic necrosis disease (AHPND) is a bacterial disease that has caused mass mortalities in farmed populations of white leg shrimp and giant tiger prawn. The causative agent is virulent strains of Vibrio parahemolyticus and four other Vibrio species (V. harvey, V. campbellii, V. owendii, V. punensis). AHPND was listed by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as a notifiable disease in 2016 (OIE, 2019a).
The disease was initially reported in Asia in 2010. It has since been reported in the Americas (2013) and Africa (2017). See WOAH WAHIS for recent information on distribution at the country level (WOAH, 2023).
The causative agents, discovered in 2013, are isolates of V. parahaemolyticus and related Vibrio species that carry a 69-73 kbp plasmid (pVA1) containing pirABvp genes that produce proteins (12.7 kDa and 50.1 kDa) that act together to cause AHPND. The pirABvp toxin genes in these Vibrio species are similar to the pirAB toxin genes of Photorhabdus spp., which are gram-negative, luminescent, rod-shaped bacteria in the Family Enterobacteriaceae (FAO, 2018). The PirAB has an insecticidal property; its toxicity results in severe swelling and shedding of the midgut epithelium in larvae of the moth Plutella xylostella.
Clinical signs and mortality of AHPND can start as early as 10 days post-stocking. Major clinical signs involve shrimp hepato-pancreas: significant atrophy, loss of colour, and the presence of black spots or streaks due to melanised tubules. Additional clinical signs include soft shells and an empty stomach or near-empty midgut (OIE, 2019a).
