Power outages can manifest in various forms, including transient faults, brownouts, and blackouts. They may initiate from both the supply and demand side. In some cases, power outages also materialise as the result of a situational response, such as in order to prevent worse consequences (e.g., rolling blackouts).
Event severity of power outages may exceed the ordinary by far; for instance, the Electric Infrastructure Security Council defines a Black Sky Hazard as "a catastrophic event that severely disrupts the normal functioning of our critical infrastructures in multiple regions for long durations" (EIS Council, 2019). The process of full restoration of the electricity network after the total or partial shutdown of the grid is sometimes termed as a black start (UK Cabinet Office, 2023).
Terminology and definitions may vary, even significantly, across operational contexts and agencies.

## Drivers

Power outages are associated with cascading and systemic risks rooted at the intersection between physical, societal, functional and organisational dynamics (Pescaroli and Alexander, 2016). Triggering events include failure of operation, failure of equipment or material damage, human errors, ageing infrastructure, and damage caused by natural hazards on equipment, facilities and lines (Amin, 2002; Little, 2002; Petermann et al., 2011; Karagiannis et al., 2017). Directly and indirectly targeted malicious acts include cyberattacks, terrorist acts, or electromagnetic pulse attacks (Amin, 2002; Linkov et al., 2013).

## Impacts

The impact of power outages can have cascading effects on healthcare systems, communication networks, and water supply systems. These can be amplified if the outage happens in concurrency with climate-related extreme events (e.g., cold waves, heat waves) (Klinger et al., 2014). Since the early 2000s, larger impacts of power outages have been associated with growing and varying demand, network size and complexity, as well as market deregulation (Helbing et al., 2006). Electric power is indispensable in modern society, influencing work, healthcare, leisure, economy, and livelihood. Critical social services such as emergency response, law enforcement, transportation, and communication systems heavily rely on uninterrupted electricity. Extended power outages can greatly impair their functionality, posing risks to public safety and hindering emergency response efforts (Rouhana et al., 2025). 
Petermann et al. (2011) illustrated that power outages can heavily disrupt societal and economic functions both directly (due to the lack of energy they rely on) and indirectly (e.g., through interdependencies). According to Pescaroli et al. (2017), the effects of power outages are associated with direct threats to life (e.g., impacts on the health sector, water shortages, or disruption of heating and cooling); indirect threats to life (e.g., increased need of the vulnerable population, loss of cash flow); and challenges for operational capacities (e.g., loss of efficiency of emergency services). 
During power outages, people may turn to alternative energy sources during blackouts - e.g. stoves and burners used inside, which may cause carbon monoxide poisoning (CH0302).

## Metrics

Metrics are in place to capture the many facets of a power outage. Some of these metrics are derived from standards such as IEEE 1366-2012 (IEEE, 2012).
- Duration/frequency/occurrence time. For electric power utilities, commonly used reliability indicators include the System Aver- age Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) and System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI). In power outages analysis and reporting, it is common to refer to short- to long-duration events as a function of the specific legislative and operational context. For instance, the US Department of Homeland Security (2017) refers to a "long-term (+72 hours) interruption", while in general customer interruptions are considered as power outages even if much briefer. Important figures are those related to the occurrence times of the failure event chains.
- Magnitude and size. Typical indicators assess the affected parts and quotas of the grid, the estimated electricity not provided, or the geographic extent of the event. Power outages are often described as local, regional, national, cross-national, up to global. However, geography-based reporting may depend on jurisdictions and generally it is not possible to find an official definition on the size of blackouts (Galbusera and Giannopoulos, 2018).
- Number of users affected. Figures typically considered are the number of people or households affected, or similar indicators for industries and businesses, sometimes accompanied by spatio-temporal details (Galbusera and Giannopoulos, 2018).
- Economic indices. Indices in use to evaluate supply interruption-related costs include, the Interruption Energy Assessment Rate (IEAR), Value of Lost Load (VOLL), and Willingness to Pay (WTP) (e.g., €/kWh). A comprehensive impact quantification should account for both direct and indirect costs (Galbusera and Giannopoulos, 2018).
- The System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) is a metric used in the electric power industry to measure the reliability of a utility's power system. It represents the average total duration of power outages experienced by a customer in a given period, typically a year. SAIDI is calculated by summing the total outage duration for all customers served and dividing by the total number of customers. A lower SAIDI value indicates a more reliable power system. (World Bank, no date a)
- The System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI) is a metric used by electric power utilities to measure the average number of power interruptions experienced by a customer over a given time period, typically a year. It's calculated by dividing the total number of customer interruptions by the total number of customers served. SAIFI is measured in units of interruptions per customer. (World Bank, no date b)

## Multi-Hazard Context

The figure below summarises common interactions between power outages or blackouts and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify, or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.

## Risk Management

Risk management strategies include national and international risk assessments, development of policies and practices for continuity management, training and exercises for complex scenarios involving multiple interdependent failures, assessment of new technologies (e.g., microgrids, cashless transactions), and the improvement of crisis communication before, during and after power outage events (FEMA, 2018). 
Khediri et al. proposed a novel Early Warning System for predicting blackouts in smart grids. This system is based on deep learning models, specifically Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Deep Self-Organizing Maps (DSOM), designed to analyse data from various sources, including power demand, generation, transmission, distribution, and weather forecasts. The system's performance was evaluated using a dataset composed of time windows and labels indicating whether a blackout occurred within the respective time frame. It achieved an accuracy of 98.71% and a precision of 98.65% in predicting blackouts. These results suggest that the Early Warning System is a promising tool for enhancing the resilience and reliability of power grids while mitigating the impacts of blackouts on communities and businesses (Khediri et al., 2024).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

Not available
