Contagious bovine pleuropneumonia (CBPP) is a prominent cattle disease in Africa. With a mortality rate of up to 50%, it causes significant economic losses (WOAH, no date). CBPP is preventable through control measures, including vaccination. Most countries maintain a list of approved veterinary vaccines for use. For specific disease control recommendations, please contact the relevant national veterinary authorities.
CBPP was known in Europe as early as the 16th century. It was spread throughout the world by increased international trade in live cattle in the second half of the 19th century. Stamping out policy eradicated the disease from many countries; however, it currently persists in sub-Saharan Africa. The main problems for control or eradication are the frequent occurrence of subacute or unapparent infections and the persistence of chronic carriers after the clinical phase. Because it is highly contagious with a mortality rate of up to 50%, it causes significant economic losses. CBPP is a prominent cattle disease in Africa (WOAH, no date).
Typically, when first introduced into a CBPP-free herd, CBPP is severe and mortality relatively high. Transmission of the disease occurs through direct contact between an infected and a susceptible animal which becomes infected by inhaling droplets disseminated by coughing. Since some animals can carry the disease without showing signs of illness, controlling the spread is more difficult (WOAH, no date).
A small proportion of cattle may die rapidly without showing any clinical signs other than fever. However, because the incubation period can be as long as six months, the clinical signs may become apparent only several weeks after the contact. The disease can therefore become established in a herd before it is noticed, and tracing back to the origin can be difficult.
The hyperacute form, involving up to 10 percent of infected animals, may be observed at the onset of an outbreak. Death is sudden and is often without any other signs.
The acute form is observed in approximately 20 percent of diseased animals. The course is usually from five to seven days. The earliest signs are a sudden onset of fever to 40°C or more and, in milking cows, a drop in milk yield. Sick cattle tend to isolate themselves from the herd and may stop eating. A typical respiratory disease develops; breathing is laboured and obviously painful. Abdominal breathing with a respiratory rate of 50 to 55 breaths/minute may be seen and cattle may "grunt" when breathing out. Some animals develop a shallow, dry and painful cough, particularly noticeable on exercise. Application of pressure between the ribs is painful and resented by affected cattle, which sometimes react violently. On percussion, the ventral part of the chest sounds dull owing to the presence of fluid in the chest cavity. Acutely affected cattle stand with head and neck extended and forelegs spread apart (FAO, 1997 - see Plate 1), with dilated nostrils and mouth open panting for air. There may be nasal discharge, sometimes streaked with blood, and frothy saliva accumulates around the mouth. Some animals develop swellings of the throat and dewlap. Pregnant cows and heifers may abort, and diarrhoea has been recorded.
The subacute form occurs most frequently in about 40 to 50 percent of the animals affected. The symptoms resemble those of the acute form but are less severe and the fever is intermittent. This form usually becomes chronic.
At necropsy, the thoracic cavity may contain a lot of clear yellow or turbid fluid, and the diseased lung (largely unilateral, affecting only one lung) is enlarged, solid and covered by thick deposits of fibrin (FAO, 1997 see Plates 2). On a section of the lung, the typical marble-like appearance is evident because of the widened interlobular septa and subpleural tissue that encloses grey, yellow, or red consolidated lung lobules (FAO, 1997 - see Plate 7 and 8).
The chronic form is a natural evolution of both acute and subacute forms but in some animals, it may develop directly. The clinical signs regress but cattle can still have intermittent fever, together with loss of both appetite and weight. In addition to the presence of lung adherence on the ribs (FAO, 1997 - see Plate 5 and 6), areas of dead lung tissue become surrounded by a capsule of fibrous connective tissue. This structure is called a sequestrum (FAO, 1997 - see Plate 9). Sequestra of different diameters can be detected in the same lung.
Calves in the first six months of life more often show lameness from swollen, hot, painful limb joints (FAO, 1997).
CBPP is one of the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) listed diseases (WOAH, 2024b).
Humans are not known to be susceptible to CBPP, so there is no public health risk. (WOAH, 2024a; no date).

## Drivers

Contamination may be caused by the introduction of the bacterium to a susceptible flock lack of biosecurity, and presence of vectors (FAO, 2017). CBPP may spread through cattle movements (e.g. transhumance or insecurity when displaced people bring their cattle when they move (or move back).

## Impacts

Death of infected animals, spread of infection, trade ban (FAO, 2017). Although the mortality rate is generally low, economic losses result from loss of condition, decreased milk production, abortions, infertility and damaged hides.

## Metrics

CBPP is one of the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) listed diseases (WOAH, 2024b). Reports are available on organisations such as the World Organisation for Animal Health map of CSF official status (WOAH) website (WOAH, 2024c).

## Multi-Hazard Context

CBPP was known in Europe as early as the 16th century. It was spread throughout the world by increased international trade in live cattle in the second half of the 19th century. Stamping out policy eradicated the disease from many countries; however, it currently persists in sub-Saharan Africa. The main problems for control or eradication are the frequent occurrence of subacute or unapparent infections and the persistence of chronic carriers after the clinical phase.
Because it is highly contagious with a mortality rate of up to 50%, it causes significant economic losses. CBPP is a prominent cattle disease in Africa (WOAH, no date).

## Risk Management

The main problems for control or eradication are the frequent occurrence of subacute or unapparent infections and the persistence of chronic carriers after the clinical phase. In most continents, control strategies are based on the early detection of outbreaks, control of animal movements and a stamping-out policy. This has successfully eliminated the disease from North America and Europe. In Africa, control of the disease is currently based mainly on vaccination campaigns. However, it remains important that effective surveillance of the disease through slaughterhouse inspection is an efficient method of detecting clinical cases. Treatment of affected animals with antibiotics can result in healthy-looking animals that are still infected and able to spread the disease, so it is not recommended. Vaccination with an attenuated strain of the bacteria is used to reduce the level of infection but access to vaccines in remote areas remains complex (WOAH, no date). 
In summary proving vaccination programmes, vector control, movement control and farm biosecurity are all critical to risk management of CBPP cases and outbreaks (FAO, 2017).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

The section and the table below offer an overview of monitoring for contagious bovine pleuropneumonia. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Livestock; FAO Reference Centres, WOAH Reference Centres.
 | How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast? | Through its global early warning system, FAO has been supporting Members with risk monitoring, assessment and forecasting for animal health threats to enhance preparedness and response to animal health threats:
- The Global Animal Disease Information System, EMPRES-i+, plays a crucial role in supporting countries with early warning and early detection of animal disease outbreaks. By providing a comprehensive platform for real-time disease tracking, EMPRES-i+, enables monitoring and analysis of animal health threats effectively, collaborating closely with countries and regions on disease information sharing. This supports the dissemination of risk assessments and alerts for evidence-based decision-making.
- FAO develops and maintains decision support tools that provide risk maps of existing and predicted risks of animal disease emergence, as well as other threats to the agri-food chain.
- Additionally, FAO collaborates closely with international organizations like WHO and WOAH to verify disease information through integrated mechanisms such as the Epidemic Intelligence from Open Sources (EIOS), the Global Early Warning System (GLEWS+), and the World Animal Health Information System (WAHIS) for WOAH-listed diseases. These collaborations allow for the dissemination of early warning alerts and risk assessments to Members, to enable timely responses to potential outbreaks.FAO empres-i+ https://empres-i.apps.fao.org/diseases
WOAH WAHIS https://wahis.woah.org/#/event-management
