Over 200 diseases are caused by ingestion of food that is contaminated with bacteria, viruses, parasites or chemical substances such as heavy metals. This growing public health concern causes considerable socioeconomic impacts through strains on healthcare systems, lost productivity, and harm to tourism and trade. These diseases contribute significantly to the global burden of disease and mortality (WHO, no date a). 
The contamination of food may occur at any stage of the food production, delivery and consumption chain. Foodborne diseases can result from several forms of environmental contamination, including pollution in water, soil or air, as well as unsafe food storage and processing (WHO, no date a).
Foodborne disease hazards include (but are not limited to) pathogenic bacteria, viruses, algae, protozoa, fungi, parasites, prions, toxins and other harmful metabolites of microbial origin, as well as chemicals and radioactive materials.
Foodborne illnesses are usually infectious or toxic in nature and caused by bacteria, viruses, parasites or chemical substances entering the body through contaminated food. Chemical contamination can lead to acute poisoning or long-term diseases, such as cancer (WHO, 2024). Many foodborne diseases may lead to long-lasting disability and death. Some examples of food hazards are listed below.
- Bacteria:
- Salmonella, Campylobacter and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli are some of the most common foodborne pathogens that affect millions of people annually, sometimes with severe and fatal outcomes. Symptoms can include fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhoea. Foods more frequently involved in outbreaks of salmonellosis include eggs, poultry and other products of animal origin. Foodborne cases due to Campylobacter are mainly caused by raw milk, raw or undercooked poultry and drinking water. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli is often associated with unpasteurized milk, undercooked meat and contaminated fresh fruits and vegetables (WHO, 2024).
- Listeria infections can lead to miscarriage in pregnant women or death of newborn babies. Although disease occurrence is relatively low, Listeria's severe and sometimes fatal health consequences, particularly among infants, children and the elderly, count them among the most serious foodborne infections. Listeria is found in unpasteurised dairy products and various ready-to-eat foods and can grow at refrigeration temperatures (WHO, 2024).
- Vibrio cholerae can infect people through contaminated water or food. Symptoms may include abdominal pain, vomiting and profuse watery diarrhoea, which quickly lead to severe dehydration and possibly death. Raw vegetables and various types of raw or undercooked seafood have been implicated in cholera outbreaks (WHO, 2024).
- Antimicrobials, such as antibiotics, are essential to treat infections caused by bacteria, including foodborne pathogens. However, their overuse and misuse in veterinary and human medicine has been linked to the emergence and spread of resistant bacteria, rendering the treatment of infectious diseases ineffective in animals and humans (WHO, 2024).
- Viruses: Some viruses can be transmitted by food consumption. Norovirus is a common cause of foodborne infections that is characterized by nausea, explosive vomiting, watery diarrhoea and abdominal pain. Hepatitis A virus can also be transmitted by food and can cause long-lasting liver disease and typically spreads through raw or undercooked seafood or contaminated raw produce (WHO, 2024).
- Parasites: Some parasites, such as fish-borne trematodes, are only transmitted through food. Others, for example, tapeworms like Echinococcus spp, or Taenia spp, may infect people through food or direct contact with animals. Other parasites, such as Ascaris, Cryptosporidium, Entamoeba histolytica or Giardia, enter the food chain via water or soil and can contaminate fresh produce (WHO, 2024).
- Prions: Prions, infectious agents composed of protein, are unique in that they are associated with specific forms of neurodegenerative disease. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, or so-called mad cow disease) is a prion disease in cattle, associated with the variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) in humans. Consuming meat products containing specified risk material, such as brain tissue, is the most likely route of transmission of the prion agent to humans (WHO, 2024).
- Chemicals - of most concern for health are naturally occurring toxins and environmental pollutants.
- Naturally occurring toxins include mycotoxins, marine biotoxins, cyanogenic glycosides and toxins occurring in poisonous mushrooms. Staple foods like corn or cereals can contain high levels of mycotoxins, such as aflatoxin and ochratoxin, produced by mould on grain. Long-term exposure can affect the immune system and normal development, or cause cancer (WHO, 2024).
- Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are compounds that accumulate in the environment and the human body. Known examples are dioxins and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which are unwanted by-products of industrial processes and waste incineration. They are found worldwide in the environment and accumulate in animal food chains. Dioxins are highly toxic and can cause reproductive and developmental problems, damage the immune system, interfere with hormones and cause cancer (WHO, 2024).
- Heavy metals such as lead, cadmium and mercury cause neurological and kidney damage. Contamination by heavy metals in food occurs mainly through pollution of water and soil (WHO, 2024).
- Other hazards in food can include radioactive nucleotides that can be discharged into the environment from industries and from civil or military nuclear operations, food allergens, residues of drugs and other contaminants incorporated in the food during the process (WHO, 2024).

## Drivers

Access to sufficient amounts of safe and nutritious food is key to sustaining life and promoting good health. Unsafe food containing harmful bacteria, viruses, parasites or chemical substances causes more than 200 diseases, ranging from diarrhoea to cancers. It also creates a vicious cycle of disease and malnutrition, particularly affecting infants, young children, the elderly and the sick. Good collaboration between governments, food producers, and consumers is needed to help ensure food safety and stronger food systems (WHO, 2024).

## Impacts

Every year, nearly one in 10 people around the world fall ill after eating contaminated food, leading to over 420,000 deaths. Children are disproportionately affected, with 125,000 deaths every year in people under 5 years of age. The majority of these cases are caused by diarrhoeal diseases. Other serious consequences of foodborne diseases include kidney and liver failure, brain and neural disorders, reactive arthritis and cancer (WHO, no date a).

## Metrics

The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that each year worldwide, unsafe food causes 600 million cases of foodborne diseases and 420,000 deaths. 30% of foodborne deaths occur among children under 5 years of age. The WHO estimated that 33 million years of healthy lives are lost due to eating unsafe food globally each year, and that this number is likely to be an underestimate (WHO, 2021 a).

## Multi-Hazard Context

Foodborne diseases are closely linked to poverty in low- and middle-income countries but are a growing public health issue around the world. Increasing international trade and longer, more complex food chains increase the risk of food contamination and the transport of infected food products across national borders. Growing cities, climate change, migration and growing international travel compound these issues and expose people to new hazards (WHO, no date a).

## Risk Management

WHO works to assist Member States in building capacity to prevent, detect and manage foodborne risks. Foodborne diseases are reflected in several targets of United Nations Sustainable Developmental Goal 3 and are a priority area within WHO’s work Activities include research and independent scientific assessments of food-related hazards, foodborne disease awareness programmes, and helping to promote food safety through national healthcare programmes (WHO, no date a). WHO aims to strengthen national food control systems to facilitate global prevention, detection and response to public health threats associated with unsafe food (WHO, 2025). To do this, WHO supports Member States by: 
- facilitating the implementation of the WHO Global Strategy for Food Safety (2022–2030) to support Member States in strengthening their national food control systems and reducing the burden of foodborne diseases through the activities of the WHO Alliance for Food Safety tacking the One Health approach (WHO, 2022); 
- providing independent scientific assessments on microbiological and chemical hazards that form the basis for international food standards, guidelines, and recommendations, known as the Codex Alimentarius (FAO & WHO, no date); 
- assessing the performance of national food control systems throughout the entire food chain, identifying priority areas for further development, and measuring and evaluating progress over time through the FAO/WHO food control system assessment tool (WHO and FAO, 2021); 
- assessing the safety of new technologies used in food production, such as genetic modification, cultivated food products and nanotechnology; 
- helping implement adequate infrastructure to manage food safety risks and respond to food safety emergencies through the International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN) (WHO, no date c); 
- promoting safe food handling through systematic disease prevention and awareness programmes, through the WHO Five Keys to Safer Food message and training materials (WHO, 2006); 
- advocating for food safety as an important component of health security and for integrating food safety into national policies and programmes in line with the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) (WHO, 2016); 
- strengthening surveillance of and response to foodborne diseases globally by supporting countries to improve their current foodborne disease surveillance and response activities (WHO, 2017) (including through the use of Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) (WHO, 2023)) and integrate them into existing national surveillance and response systems required by the IHR 2005; and 
- monitoring regularly the global burden of foodborne diseases at national, regional and international levels (WHO, no date d), and supporting countries to estimate the national burden of foodborne diseases (WHO, 2021 a) or utilize existing burden estimates to inform food safety policies. WHO works closely with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH), the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) and other international organizations to ensure food safety along the entire food chain from production to consumption, in line with the One health joint plan of action (‎2022‒2026)‎: working together for the health of humans, animals, plants and the environment (FAO et al., 2022).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

WHO supports countries to conduct all-hazards strategic risk assessment in the contexts of health emergencies and disasters, which results in the development of a country risk profile. Empowered with the country risk profile, inclusive of a seasonal risk calendar, countries can anticipate potential emergencies before they occur to trigger early alerts and inform early actions (WHO, 2021 b).
WHO's Early Warning, Alert and Response System (EWARS) has been designed to improve disease outbreak detection in emergency settings, such as in countries in conflict or following a natural disaster. It is a simple and cost-effective way to rapidly set up a disease surveillance system. EWARS is deployed during an emergency as an adjunct to the national disease surveillance system. WHO works with Ministries of Health and health sector partners to train local health workers to use the system. After the emergency, EWARS should re-integrate back into the national system (WHO, no date b).
