Although first described in the 1950s, the virus causing Lassa disease was not identified until 1969. Lassa fever is a zoonotic disease, meaning that humans become infected from contact with infected animals. The animal reservoir, or host, of Lassa virus is a rodent of the genus Mastomys, commonly known as the 'multimammate rat'. Mastomys rats infected with Lassa virus do not become ill but can shed the virus in their urine and faeces (WHO, 2024a). People at greatest risk are those living in rural areas where Mastomys are usually found, especially in communities with poor sanitation or crowded living conditions. Lassa fever occurs in all age groups and both sexes.
About 80% of people who become infected with Lassa virus have no symptoms. One in five infections results in severe disease, where the virus affects several organs such as the liver, spleen and kidneys. Because the clinical course of the disease is so variable, detection of the disease in affected patients has been difficult. When the disease is confirmed to be present in a community, however, prompt isolation of affected patients, good infection prevention and control practices, and rigorous contact tracing can stop outbreaks (WHO, 2024a).
Lassa fever is difficult to diagnose because the symptoms are non-specific. Definitive diagnosis requires viral and serological testing available only in reference laboratories. Isolation of the virus is usually done from blood, urine or throat washings (WHO, 2024a).
Lassa fever can cause prolonged epidemics and is endemic in Benin, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Sierra Leone and Nigeria (WHO, 2016a). Two recent outbreaks are summarized below:
- Liberia: Lassa fever is endemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) reported that from 1 January 2017 through 23 January 2018, 91 suspected cases were reported from six counties: Bong, Grand Bassa, Grand Kru, Lofa, Margibi, and Nimba. Thirty- three of these cases were laboratory-confirmed, including 15 deaths (case-fatality rate for confirmed cases = 45.4%) (WHO, 2018).
- Nigeria: A large outbreak of Lassa fever was reported in Nigeria in 2023, with 4702 suspected cases, five probable cases, and 877 confirmed cases between epidemiological weeks 1 and 15 of 2023 (week ending 16 April). Among confirmed cases, there were 152 deaths (CFR 17%) within the reporting period. This represented a 20% increase in confirmed cases in comparison with those reported during the same period in 2022 (733) (WHO 2023).The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has published information on case definitions and classification for viral haemorrhagic fevers (CDC, 2024).
The WHO has published recommendations for prevention and control (WHO, 2024a).
Research conducted in domestic and non-domestic animals (in Birds, lizards, and domestic mammals [dogs, pigs, cattle and goats]) from 2021-2022 in southern Nigeria showed lizards had the highest positivity rate by PCR and seropositivity was highest among cattle (Happi et al., 2023).

## Drivers

Transmission is primarily from direct and indirect contact with the urine or faeces of infected Mastomys rats, usually from contaminated surfaces, food and water. Humans usually become infected with Lassa virus from exposure to urine or faeces of infected Mastomys rats. Lassa virus may also be spread between humans through direct contact with the blood, urine, faeces, or other bodily secretions of a person infected with Lassa fever. There is no epidemiological evidence supporting airborne spread between humans. Person-to-person transmission occurs in both community and health-care settings, where the virus may be spread by contaminated medical equipment, such as re-used needles. Lassa virus may persist in the semen of some males who recovered from the disease for up to a few months. However, to date, no transmission via exposure to infected semen had ever been documented (WHO, 2024a).

## Impacts

The incubation period of Lassa fever ranges from 6 to 21 days. The onset of the disease, when it is symptomatic, is usually gradual, starting with fever, general weakness, and malaise. After a few days, headache, sore throat, muscle pain, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, cough, and abdominal pain may follow. In severe cases, facial swelling, fluid in the lung cavity, bleeding from the mouth, nose, vagina or gastrointestinal tract and low blood pressure may develop. Shock, seizures, tremors, disorientation, and coma may be seen in the later stages. Death usually occurs within 14 days of onset in fatal cases. Deafness occurs in 25% of patients who survive the disease. In half of these cases, hearing returns partially after one to three months (WHO, 2024a). 
Transient hair loss and gait disturbance may occur during recovery. During pregnancy, Lassa fever can cause high maternal and foetal mortality, especially late in pregnancy. In the third trimester, foetal death and maternal death rates can exceed 80% and 30% respectively (WHO, 2024a). 
Because the symptoms of Lassa fever are so varied and non-specific, clinical diagnosis is often difficult, especially early in the course of the disease. Lassa fever is difficult to distinguish from other viral haemorrhagic fevers such as Ebola virus disease, malaria, shigellosis, typhoid fever and yellow fever (WHO, 2024b).

## Metrics

Although approximately 80% of infections are thought to be asymptomatic or mild, with symptoms including fever, headache, nausea, and vomiting, a small proportion of patients develop severe disease that can be fatal or lead to long-term sequelae such as deafness. Pregnant women in their third trimester are particularly at risk, with maternal death, adverse birth outcomes, or both, occurring in more than 80% of cases. Despite the reportedly low infection-fatality ratio, Lassa fever is one of the diseases with the highest burden among the WHO research and development priority pathogens (Doohan et al., 2024).

## Multi-Hazard Context

Person-to-person transmission can also occur, particularly in health care settings lacking adequate infection prevention and control measures. The overall case fatality rate is 1% but observed case fatality rate among patients hospitalized with severe diseases of Lassa fever is 15% and above (WHO, 2024a). 
The disease is closely associated with inadequate community sanitation and with unsafe water or unsafe food storage where rats have easy access. Prevention of Lassa fever relies on promoting good ‘community hygiene’ to discourage rodents from entering homes. Effective measures include storing grain and other foodstuffs in rodent-proof containers, disposing of garbage far from the home, maintaining clean households and keeping cats. Because Mastomys are so abundant in endemic areas, it is not possible to completely eliminate them from the environment. Family members should always be careful to avoid contact with blood and body fluids while caring for sick persons (WHO, 2024a).
Prolonged epidemics cause serious economic and social disruption (WHO, 2024a).

## Risk Management

During an outbreak, health care professionals are at high risk of transmission, and these are associated with close contact to contaminated surfaces, sample collection, transport and laboratory investigations. In health-care settings, staff should always apply standard infection prevention and control precautions when caring for patients, regardless of their presumed diagnosis. These include basic hand hygiene, respiratory hygiene, use of personal protective equipment (to block splashes or other contact with infected materials), safe injection practices and safe burial practices. The WHO recommends standard infection prevention and control precautions (WHO, 2024a). 
On rare occasions, travellers returning from endemic areas were confirmed for Lassa fever. Although malaria, typhoid fever and many other tropical infections are much more common, the diagnosis of Lassa fever should be considered in febrile patients returning from West Africa, especially if they have had exposures in areas where Lassa fever is known to be endemic. Healthcare workers seeing a patient suspected to have Lassa fever should immediately contact local and national experts for advice and to arrange for laboratory testing (WHO, 2024a). 
The Ministries of Health of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, WHO, the Office of the United States Foreign Disaster Assistance, the United Nations, and other partners have worked together to establish the Mano River Union Lassa Fever Network. The programme supports these three countries in developing national prevention strategies and enhancing laboratory diagnostics for Lassa fever and other dangerous diseases. Training in laboratory diagnosis, clinical management, and environmental control is also included (WHO, 2020). 
With the WHO’s overall coordination and oversight, together with a task force of internationally recognized subject-matter experts, including scientists from the most affected countries, with specific expertise in arenaviruses and in one or more research and development areas, and with support from the Wellcome Trust, the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy (CIDRAP) at the University of Minnesota has been tasked with facilitating the collaborative development of an “Lassa fever R&D RoadMap”. The roadmap prioritizes the development of countermeasures (diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines) that are most needed by Lassa fever-affected countries and is the result of extensive consultations with the Lassa R&D roadmap task force, leading national and international experts and other key stakeholders (WHO, 2019).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

WHO supports countries to conduct all-hazards strategic risk assessment in the contexts of health emergencies and disasters, which results in the development of a country risk profile. Empowered with the country risk profile, inclusive of a seasonal risk calendar, countries can anticipate potential emergencies before they occur to trigger early alerts and inform early actions (WHO, 2021).
WHO's Early Warning, Alert and Response System (EWARS) has been designed to improve disease outbreak detection in emergency settings, such as in countries in conflict or following a natural disaster. It is a simple and cost-effective way to rapidly set up a disease surveillance system. EWARS is deployed during an emergency as an adjunct to the national disease surveillance system. WHO works with Ministries of Health and health sector partners to train local health workers to use the system. After the emergency, EWARS should re-integrate back into the national system (WHO, 2023b).
