Human
Rabies is caused by the rabies virus in the family Rhabdoviridae and the genus Lyssavirus. It is a zoonotic disease, (an infectious disease which spreads from humans to animals) and probably the oldest known infectious disease of people. Rabies is a serious public health problem (WHO, 2024a).
Tens of thousands of people die from rabies each year. Rabies is a fatal but preventable infectious disease. Human rabies is preventable via thorough wound washing, administration of a course of human rabies vaccine and, when indicated, rabies immunoglobulins (RIG) (WHO, 2024a)
In up to 99% of human rabies cases, dogs are responsible for virus transmission. Children between the ages of 5 and 14 years are frequent victims (WHO, 2024a).
Rabies is transmitted through inoculation of infectious saliva via a bite (most common), scratch, or direct contact with mucosa (e.g. eyes, mouth, or open wound). This causes local muscle infection and then uptake by peripheral nerves where it spreads to the central nervous system and replicates in the brain prior to spreading to salivary glands and being excreted in saliva (WHO, 2024a).
Vaccinating people and dogs saves lives and stops transmission. Rabies in people can be prevented through dog bite prevention, wound washing, and post-exposure prophylaxis. Rabies in dogs can be prevented through responsible dog ownership and routine mass dog vaccination (WHO, 2024a).
Clinically rabies is characterized by an incubation phase, a prodromal phase and then a neurological phase which precedes death. In humans, following exposure, the incubation period is usually 4-12 weeks (but may range from < 1 week to > 12 months). Rabies is almost always fatal once clinical signs appear. This is followed by a prodromal phase of generic symptoms such as fever, malaise, fatigue, headaches, loss of appetite and tingling at the wound site. Their neurological phase consists of two distinct clinical forms, furious and paralytic. The furious form is characterized by hyperactivity, hallucinations, aerophobia, hydrophobia, excessive salivation, and aggression and usually lasts 5 days. The paralytic form is characterized by progressive paralysis and coma and usually lasts up to 14 days (WHO, 2018a).
An estimated 59,000 people die each year from rabies; however, this number is likely a gross underestimate due to underreporting and uncertain estimates. It can be misdiagnosed as another viral encephalitis or cerebral malaria, many deaths occur at home, surveillance is inadequate, and it commonly affects poor, rural communities which are commonly underserved.
Currently, there are no WHO-approved diagnostic tools for detecting rabies infection before the onset of clinical disease. Clinical diagnosis of rabies is difficult without a reliable history of contact with a rabid animal or specific symptoms of hydrophobia or aerophobia. Accurate risk assessment is crucial for deciding on PEP administration (WHO, 2024a). Once symptoms emerge, and death is inevitable, offering comprehensive and compassionate palliative care is recommended. Post-mortem confirmation of rabies infection is done by various diagnostic techniques that detect whole viruses, viral antigens, or nucleic acids in infected tissues (brain, skin or saliva) (WHO, 2024a). Where possible, the biting animal should be tested (WHO, 2024a).
Wound washing as soon as possible after exposure for 15 minutes with copious amounts of soap and water is the first life-saving measure following exposure. A detailed assessment should be conducted to determine PEP eligibility, including an assessment of the health status of the biting animal, wound category and if the patient has already received rabies vaccine. Pre-exposure prophylaxis shortens but does not replace post-exposure prophylaxis, WHO has produced a decision tree to aid this process (WHO, 2024b; WHO 2024a PEP should be started as soon as possible following exposure; it is never too late to administer PEP. Pre-exposure prophylaxis vaccine is recommended for high-risk individuals such as communities and travellers in remote, highly endemic settings and individuals at occupational risk. WHO prequalified vaccines are safe, effective, and well tolerated (WHO, 2024a). There are a number of approved vaccine schedules, however, intra-dermal vaccination is recommended as it saves costs, doses and time (WHO, 2018b). Rabies immunoglobulin (RIG) is recommended for severe exposure for those who have not previously received rabies vaccines.
Since rabies is widespread in most of the world and across many animal species, it is very difficult to eradicate but: domestic dogs play a crucial role in the transmission of rabies to other species.
Rabies elimination requires a One Health approach. Human and dog rabies are correlated. Addressing rabies at its source - dog rabies -is the most efficient and cost-effective way to break transmission. The World Health Organization (WHO), the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH), the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Global Alliance for Rabies Control have united to deliver Zero by 30: The Global Strategic Plan to Prevent Human Deaths from Dog-Transmitted Rabies by 2030. It provides a coordinated response using a three-pillar approach: increasing availability of human post-exposure prophylaxis, awareness and community engagement and mass dog vaccination. This aligns with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals through strengthening human and veterinary health systems to reach the world's most underserved populations (WHO, FAO & OIE, 2018).
Community engagement is fundamental to the success of mass dog vaccination; local communities are key stakeholders. Rabies elimination happens at community level. Awareness activities must target vulnerable populations.
Animal
Rabies is a viral disease that affects the central nervous system of mammals (dogs, cats, foxes etc.) (WOAH, no date). Rabies is preventable through vaccination (Rupprecht & Gatewood, 2021). While 99% of human rabies cases are due to bites from infected dogs, rabies vaccines for dogs can efficiently eliminate the disease at its animal source (WOAH, no date). Most countries maintain a list of approved veterinary vaccines for use. For specific regulations, consult the country's veterinary authorities.
Rabid dogs are infective even when their clinical signs are still mild. Notably in dogs, the furious form is characterized by altered behaviour, aggression, incoordination, drooping jaw and altered tone of bark. There is an absence of aerophobia and hydrophobia in dogs (WOAH, 2024a; WOAH, 2024b)). Rabid cats can attack suddenly, biting and scratching viciously. As the disease progresses, seizures and lack of muscle coordination are common. Death is caused by progressive paralysis (MSD, 2024). In the Americas, bat species are also reservoirs for rabies virus (WHO, 2024).
Clinical signs in affected wildlife can be variable and subtle. A common and important feature is a change in behaviour including a loss of fear, ataxia, and subsequent aggression towards other animals and people. Wild animals will often lose their natural caution around humans. Animals may wander into urban areas and into buildings. Abnormal appetite (pica) and unusual vocalisation, which is often incessant. Excitation is often seen and may present as ceaseless running over long distances, with or without snapping at nearby objects, animals or people. A rabid fox may charge at and bite passing people, animals and even vehicles. Paralysis, paresis and, in the terminal stages, coma occur (Wildlife Health Australia, 2024).
There are many strains of the rabies virus maintained in particular reservoir hosts. These include Canidae (dogs, jackals, coyotes, wolves, foxes and raccoon dogs), Mustelidae (skunks, martens, weasels and stoats), Viverridae (mongooses and meerkats), Procyonidae (raccoons), and the order Chiroptera (bats). The important reservoir hosts vary with the area. Cat-adapted rabies variants have not been seen, although cats are often infected with rabies viruses from other hosts, and they can readily transmit the virus (CFSPH et al., 2009).

## Drivers

Human
Children are at greater risk than adults as they are more likely to play with animals, not to report bites, may receive more severe bites and due to their size are more often bitten on the head or receive multiple bites. These factors increase the risk of being bitten, not receiving immediate medical care and the infection spreading to the brain more quickly.
In the Americas, where dog-mediated rabies is mostly controlled, hematophagous (blood-feeding) bats are now the primary source of human rabies. Bat-mediated rabies is also an emerging public health threat in Australia and parts of Western Europe. Human deaths following exposure to foxes, raccoons, skunks, and other wild mammals are very rare, and bites from rodents are not known to transmit rabies. Contraction of rabies through inhalation of virus-containing aerosols, consumption of raw meat or milk of infected animals, or through organ transplantation is extremely rare (WHO, 2024a).
Animal
Carnivores, especially of the Canidae family represent the principal reservoir species and are responsible for the maintenance of the infectious cycle and hence for the presence of the disease. While wildlife rabies maintained by different reservoir hosts predominantly occurs in the Northern Hemisphere, canine rabies is by far more important for public health.

## Impacts

Human
Rabies has the highest case fatality rate of any currently recognised infectious disease. It is an indicator of the impact on inequity, the capacity of the health system and One Health. Rabies is present in mammals in most parts of the world. It is one of the Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTD) that predominantly affects poor and vulnerable populations who live in remote rural locations. The large majority of the estimated 59,000 human deaths from rabies per year occur in Africa and Asia (WHO, 2024a).
Animal
Deaths of humans and animals including livestock (rabies is a fatal disease of mammals).

## Metrics

An estimated 59,000 people die of rabies every year in over 150 countries, approximately 99% are acquired from the bite of an infected dog. 95% of human cases occur in Africa and Asia. Due to underreporting and uncertain estimates, this number is likely a gross underestimate. The burden of disease is disproportionally borne by rural poor populations, with approximately half of cases attributable to children under 15 years of age (WHO, 2024a).
The global cost of rabies is estimated to be around US$ 8.6 billion per year including lost lives and livelihoods, medical care and livestock losses, as well as uncalculated psychological trauma (WHO, 2024a).

## Multi-Hazard Context

In the Americas, where dog-mediated rabies is mostly controlled, hematophagous (blood-feeding) bats are now the primary source of human rabies. Bat-mediated rabies is also an emerging public health threat in Australia and parts of western Europe. Human deaths following exposure to foxes, raccoons, skunks, and other wild mammals are very rare, and bites from rodents are not known to transmit rabies. Contraction of rabies through inhalation of virus-containing aerosols, consumption of raw meat or milk of infected animals, or through organ transplantation is extremely rare (WHO, 2024a).

## Risk Management

Human
Traditional medicine, faith healing and alternative medicine cannot prevent or cure rabies. It does not substitute life-saving PEP and can often delay it. Healers can help people cope with their illness and may be the only option in marginalized areas, so dialogue and cooperation with healers is recommended to increase compliance with PEP. 
In June 2024 Gavi announced its support for human rabies vaccines for post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) within routine immunisation. This “complements ongoing global efforts” of the Zero by 30 campaign, led by the United Against Rabies Forum, seeking to eliminate all dog-mediated human rabies deaths by 2030. Gavi’s support is incremental, it only adds to but does not replace domestic funding. It helps to accelerate existing rabies programs (WHO, 2024a).
Animal
Dog vaccination is the most cost-effective way to prevent rabies. Vaccinating 70% of the susceptible dog population stops transmission. Mass dog vaccination controls canine rabies eliminates dog-mediated human rabies deaths, safeguards those who struggle to access PEP and protects the lives of livestock and the livelihood of rural communities (WHO, 2021b). 
Indiscriminate dog culling is ineffective because the dog population will inevitably bounce back, and counterproductive as vaccinated dogs can get killed. It is not favourable to communities who may then choose to relocate their dogs. 
Mass dog vaccination must target free-roaming dogs who contribute the most to transmission. Puppies must be included in the campaigns, and a mixed-method approach is acquired to reach targets. Each dog should be re-vaccinated every 1 -2 years. Identification of vaccinated dogs can be through either collars, temporary paint or vaccine certificates. Cross-border dog vaccination campaigns are key as rabies does not recognize country borders (WHO, 2022). 
Oral vaccination may target hard-to-catch dogs but must be assessed for safety. Oral vaccination has eliminated fox, coyote, and raccoon rabies in the Northern Hemisphere. Reducing dog density has many benefits but is not necessary to eliminate rabies. Dog population management through dog ownership, dog confinement practices etc. is key to rabies elimination. 
Along with vaccination, awareness is the key to eliminating dog-mediated rabies. Along with the Zero by 30 campaign, communication materials in various languages are available (GARC, no date).

## Monitoring and Early Warning

The table below offers an overview of monitoring for rabies. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | Ministry of Health, WHO, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Livestock, FAO Reference Centres, WOAH Reference Centres
 | 
How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast?
 | Through its global early warning system, FAO has been supporting Members with risk monitoring, assessment and forecasting for animal health threats to enhance preparedness and response to animal health threats:
- The Global Animal Disease Information System, EMPRES-i+, plays a crucial role in supporting countries with early warning and early detection of animal disease outbreaks. By providing a comprehensive platform for real-time disease tracking, EMPRES-i+, enables monitoring and analysis of animal health threats effectively, collaborating closely with countries and regions on disease information sharing. This supports the dissemination of risk assessments and alerts for evidence-based decision-making.
- FAO develops and maintains decision support tools that provide risk maps of existing and predicted risks of animal disease emergence, as well as other threats to the agri-food chain.
- Additionally, FAO collaborates closely with international organizations like WHO and WOAH to verify disease information through integrated mechanisms such as the Epidemic Intelligence from Open Sources (EIOS), the Global Early Warning System (GLEWS+), and the World Animal Health Information System (WAHIS) for WOAH-listed diseases. These collaborations allow for the dissemination of early warning alerts and risk assessments to Members, to enable timely responses to potential outbreaks.FAO empres-i+ https://empres-i.apps.fao.org/diseases
WOAH WAHIS https://wahis.woah.org/#/event-management
WHO supports countries to conduct all-hazards strategic risk assessment in the contexts of health emergencies and disasters, which results in the development of a country risk profile. Empowered with the country's risk profile, inclusive of a seasonal risk calendar, countries can anticipate potential emergencies before they occur to trigger early alerts and inform early actions (WHO, 2021a).
WHO's Early Warning, Alert and Response System (EWARS) has been designed to improve disease outbreak detection in emergency settings, such as in countries in conflict or following a natural disaster. It is a simple and cost-effective way to rapidly set up a disease surveillance system. EWARS is deployed during an emergency as an adjunct to the national disease surveillance system. WHO works with Ministries of Health and health sector partners to train local health workers to use the system. After the emergency, EWARS should re-integrate back into the national system (WHO, no date).
