Aflatoxins are among the most poisonous of the mycotoxins and place communities as well as individuals at risk. Mycotoxins are toxic compounds that are naturally produced by certain types of mould (fungi). Moulds that can produce mycotoxins grow on many foodstuffs such as cereals, dried fruits, nuts and spices (see CH0601). Mould growth can occur either before harvest or after harvest, during storage, on/in the food itself often under warm, damp and humid conditions. Most mycotoxins are chemically stable and survive food processing (WHO, 2023).
Aflatoxins are difuranocoumarin derivatives with a bifuran group attached to one side of the coumarin nucleus and either a pentanone ring (B series) or a six-membered lactone ring (G series) on the other side. Major types include: Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) and B2 (AFB2), Aflatoxin G1 (AFG1) and G2 (AFG2), and Aflatoxin M1 (AFM1) and M2 (AFM2).
Several hundred different mycotoxins have been identified, but the most commonly observed mycotoxins that present a concern to human health and livestock include aflatoxins, ochratoxin A, patulin, fumonisins, zearalenone and nivalenol/deoxynivalenol. Mycotoxins appear in the food chain as a result of mould infection of crops both before and after harvest. Exposure to mycotoxins can happen either directly by eating infected food or indirectly from animals that are fed contaminated feed, especially from milk (WHO, 2023).
Aflatoxins are produced by certain moulds (Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus) which grow in soil, decaying vegetation, hay, and grains and the crops that are frequently affected by Aspergillus spp. include cereals (corn, sorghum, wheat, rice), oilseeds (soybean, peanut, sunflower, cotton seeds), spices (chili peppers, black pepper, coriander, turmeric, ginger) and tree nuts (pistachio, almond, walnut, coconut, Brazil nut). Large doses of aflatoxins can lead to acute poisoning (aflatoxicosis) and can be life-threatening, usually through damage to the liver (WHO, 2023). Aflatoxins have been classified as human carcinogens by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC, 2002). Aflatoxins are a particular concern for Africa (WHO, no date).
