The terminology 'outbreak' is used if the disease occurs in a limited location or area, epidemic if it occurs in large areas and 'pandemic' if it occurs in multiple regions and at global scale.
Plant diseases are a major concern globally, given their potential economic impact on populations that rely on income from selling crops. The impact in places where there is increased food scarcity is of particular concern, as it exacerbates the insecurity and poverty felt by populations affected by these diseases. Along with fungi and bacteria, viruses, viroids and phytoplasmas (MLOs) are considered among the main disease agents causing significant crop losses, depending on crops and local conditions.
Plant viruses are small microorganisms without cell walls, containing nucleic acids surrounded by protein coats and replicating only inside living cells (Gergerich & Dolja, 2006). Phytoplasmas are obligate prokaryotic plant pathogens that do not possess cell wall, and they are pleiomorphic in profile, with a mean diameter of 200-800 nm (FAO & IPPC, 2016). The types affecting animals are usually called mycoplasmas. They lack cell wall and are bounded by unit membrane and have cytoplasm ribosomes and strands of nuclear material. Phytoplasmas are transmitted through insects that feed on plants, including plant hoppers and psyllids.
Viruses, phytoplasmas and viroids are very difficult to control as there is no pesticide available, and they are highly resistant to antibiotics and can be saprophytic or parasitic to plants (Britannica, 2019). Viroids are microorganisms that consist of a small circular RNA molecule and are smaller than viruses and capable of causing certain plant diseases (Britannica, 2020).
The occurrence of phytoplasma in plants is a particularly difficult hazard to address, since they are 'the perfect parasite' and adapt to their host in a way that serves all their nutritional needs (Cleanroom Technology, 2008). While phytoplasmas generally do little harm, under conducive conditions they can provoke serious responses from their host causing illness and death in plants (Cleanroom Technology, 2008). Phytoplasma and Mycoplasma-Like organisms (MLOs) spread largely insect vectors such as leaf hoppers and are associated with more than 100 diseases (Arora & Sinha, 1988).
