Tailings are the fine-grained waste material remaining after the metals and minerals recoverable from processed soil or rock have been extracted. The material is produced at the 'tail end' of the process with a particle size normally ranging from 10 μm to 1.0 mm (UNECE, 2014:3). Tailings is a common by-product of the process of extracting valuable minerals and metals from mined ore. They usually take the form of a liquid slurry made of fine mineral particles, created as mined ore is crushed, ground and processed. Effective tailings management is integral to the safe and sustainable production of metals and minerals. (https://globaltailingsreview.org/about-tailings/).
Tailings are produced from several types of mining operations, including aluminium, coal, oil sands, uranium and precious and base metals (Kossoff et al., 2014). The chemical composition of tailings depends on the mineralogy of the ore body, the degree of grinding, the processing activities used to extract metals, the efficiency of the extraction process and other changes that may occur within tailings storage facilities (TSFs). Major components usually include silica also known as silicon dioxide (SiO2), iron (Fe), oxygen (O), aluminium (Al), calcium (Ca), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), manganese (Mn), sodium (Na), phosphorus (P), titanium (Ti) and sulphur (S) (Kossoff et al., 2014). Tailings may also contain toxic elements such as arsenic (As) or chemical reagents such as cyanide (CN−) which can be toxic in sufficient concentrations (Jewell, 1998).
As an example, uranium tailings are radioactive and can retain the radioactive properties of the ore from which they are derived. In parallel, their radioactivity is very long-lived; they contain a range of potentially toxic heavy metals (see chemical HIPs on heavy metals)and other compounds; they may contain sulphidic minerals with the potential to generate acid mine drainage; and the typical range of particle sizes makes them leachable, erodible or prone to failure if they are poorly managed (IAEA, 2004:6).
Tailings are also of concern due to the risk of tailing dam failures (one of the most common tailings storage methods). Failure of mining dams and the release of potentially toxic material can cause fatalities, affect water sources and sediment quality, fish, terrestrial animal life and plant life, cause sometimes irreversible environmental damage, and negatively impact biodiversity and the reputation of the mining industry. For example, on 25 January 2019, 272 people tragically lost their lives when a tailings dam collapsed at Vale's Córrego do Feijão mine in Brumadinho, Brazil.

## Drivers

TSF failures are occasionally associated with seismic activity but for rarely as seismicity is typically a critical aspect of the design considerations. One example where this occurred was in 2011 following the 9.0 magnitude earthquake off the coast of Japan's main island, Honshu, that led to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster.
As extreme rainfall events have become more prevalent due to climate change, this is a complicating factor in the management of water levels within TSFs. Some TSF failures have coincided with periods of heavy rainfall (e.g. the September 2024 failure of a TSF at Lanjigarh in Kalahandi district of Odisha - see here).

## Impacts

Tailings may contain heavy metals, arsenic, string acids and strong bases and release them in the environment.

## Metrics

While the exact numbers of TSFs is uncertain and estimates vary, there are thought to be around 8500 TSFs globally (with around 3,250 of these active). The total global volume is unknown (UNEP, 2017) but of the 1743 sites for which data exist, the combined storage volume in 2020 was 45.5 billion m3. Estimates for the global production of tailings on an annual basis range from 8.85 - 14.4 billion tonnes per annum (Oberle et al., 2020). In 2019, the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), the United Nations Environment (UN Environment) and the Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI) co-convened a global tailings review to establish an international standard (Global Tailings Review, 2019). The outcome of this work led to the publication in August 2020 of the Global Industry Standard on Tailings Management (ICMM, UNEP & PRI, 2020).

## Multi-Hazard Context

The figure below summarises common interactions between tailings and other hazards. This information should be used with caution and not be solely relied upon in Disaster Risk Management, particularly as some interactions may not have been included. Note that hazardous events occurring together or locally in space or time may not necessarily cause, amplify, or be otherwise related to each other. Specific examples of multi-hazard context can be found in the ‘Hazard drivers’ and ‘Impacts’ sections above.

## Risk Management

The most commonly used approach to the handling and storage of tailings is within dammed impoundments referred to as ‘tailings storage facilities (TSFs)’ (Oberle et al, 2020; World Bank, 2021). TSFs are engineered structures that comprise the confining embankments (commonly referred to as tailings dams) and are designed to contain tailings and to manage associated water. A They contain mixed waste material from mining processes in liquid or slurry form and must be responsibly managed to prevent impacts on human health and safety, the environment, and other infrastructure. Other less commonly used approaches for tailings disposal include riverine disposal, submarine disposal, lacustrine disposal (in lakes), backfilling underground workings, and dry stacking (some of which are dependent on prevailing conditions and regulations and some no longer considered to be good practice). 
Tailings are usually stored within TSFs under water to prevent the formation of surface dusts and acid mine drainage (by forestalling oxidation), especially when large amounts of acid-generating pyrite and pyrrhotite are present (Kossoff et al., 2014; Koomsona et al., 2021). This requires careful management of water levels within storage facilities to prevent erosion and related problems. 
TSFs require particularly careful management for preventing and minimising air, water, and soil contamination. The rate of failure has been estimated as one in 700 to one in 1750 which is significantly higher than for water-retaining dams – one in 10,000 (David, 2003). Causes of failure include overtopping, poor maintenance, breach following heavy rain, breach following earthquake, foundation failure, and retention wall failure (Kossoff et al., 2014). Furthermore, abandoned mining sites and mining waste storage facilities may contain chemicals and other elements which may be dangerous to human and animal health and to the wider environment. 
Effective legal and institutional frameworks for dam safety and environmental protection, implementation and enforcement of relevant laws and safety standards, adequate tailing dam designs based on accurate risk assessments, regular inspections and special monitoring systems are of critical importance for sound tailings management (Centre for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment, 2012). 
Application of technology-driven solutions such as remote sensing methods has shown significant development for tailing dam monitoring and early warning systems to prevent their failure. More attention needs to be given to monitoring of the leachate coming out of the ponds/dams.

## Monitoring and Early Warning

The section and the table below offer an overview of monitoring tailings. This information can be used for forecasting within a national early warning system (EWS). Since EWS capacities and processes differ across countries, the most current and specific information regarding EWS should be obtained from the appropriate national or regional agency/authority responsible for disaster management.
 | Which institution(s) produce(s) Disaster Risk Data/Information? | Surveillance programmes implemented by the TSF operator, in some instances in line with regulated requirements
 | How is the Hazard Observed/Monitored/Forecast? | Instrumentation monitoring - a mix of in ground (e.g. piezometers, inclinometers) and above ground (satellite technologies) combined with direct field observations. 
Surveillance programmes comprising instrument monitoring and visual inspections are important risk management practices for TSFs, and include internal monitoring (e.g. of deformations, pore pressures, etc.) and external monitoring (e.g. for deformation and leakage). A site-specific operations, maintenance, and surveillance (OMS) manual should be developed that describes OMS requirements based on the TSF consequence classification, current engineering design standards, and site considerations. The OMS manual should include: a description of all monitoring procedures for inspections and instrumentation monitoring; alert and alarm levels for monitored parameters; procedures for reporting on noncompliance, incidents, and failures; corrective actions; emergency plan. (Oberle et al., 2020; World Bank, 2021). 
The surveillance programmes should also focus on identifying the conditions that would result in an emergency being declared. Operators should develop and (where necessary) implement a site-specific Emergency Preparedness and Response Plane (EPRP) for such circumstances, in particular for any conditions that could lead to catastrophic failures (ICMM, 2021; ICMM, 2005).
