Major deltas such as the Mississippi and Ganges are prone to coastal flooding when affected by hurricanes (cyclones). Another sensitive area is the southern North Sea in western Europe, as a result of particular tracks of winter depressions. If the surge takes place near the mouth of a river issuing into the sea, the river flow will be obstructed due to the surge, resulting in severe flooding over and near the coastal areas. Tsunamis resulting from sub-seabed earthquakes are a very specific cause of occasionally severe coastal flooding (WMO, 2011).
Coastal flooding is largely a natural event, however, human influence on the coastal environment can exacerbate coastal flooding (Dawson et al., 2009). Extraction of water from groundwater reservoirs in the coastal zone can enhance subsidence of the land, increasing the risk of flooding (Nicholls, 2002).
Seawater can flood the land via several paths:
- Direct flooding: the sea height exceeds the elevation of the land, often where waves have not built up a natural barrier such as a dune system.
- Overtopping of a barrier: the barrier may be natural or human- engineered, and overtopping occurs due to swell conditions during storms or high tides, often on open stretches of the coast. The height of the waves exceeds the height of the barrier, and water flows over the top of the barrier to flood the land behind it. Overtopping can result in high velocity flows that can erode significant amounts of the land surface, which can undermine defence structures (Gallien et al., 2011).
- Breaching of a barrier: the barrier may be natural (sand dune) or human engineered (sea wall), and breaching occurs on open coasts exposed to large waves. Breaching is where the barrier is broken down or destroyed by waves allowing the seawater to extend inland and flood the area.
